YAMAHA.






I	Ila∑FC>/C>
DIGITAL PROGRAMMABLE ALGORITHM SYNTHESIZER
OWNER'S MANUAL

T














Welcome
Welcome to the DX7 II FD/D, the newest members of the growing family of FM digital synthesizers from Yamaha. Using the industry-standard DX7 as its starting point, the DX II offers a number of important new features, such as improved sound quality, two-layer voice programming, additional FM features, new performance options, an expanded front-panel LCD display, and on-board disk storage (on the DX7IIFD).
Since there is so much material available on the DX7 family of synthesizers (and on the theory of FM digital synthesis), this manual will not be an FM tutorial. Instead, it has been designed to be a "users manual" in the truest sense - it's goal is to help you make music with your new DX7IIFD as quickly as possible.
If you are already familiar with the operation of the original DX7, this manual will help you make the transition to the DX7IIFD in short order. On the other hand, if this is your first FM digital instrument, this manual will guide you into the operation of your new synthesizer with easy-to-follow, step-by-step instructions and explanations.
After you are comfortable with the operation of your new synthesizer, you may want to explore the fascinating world of FM digital voicing. If so, consult the extensive list of reference works on FM synthesis listed in the bibliography at the back of this manual.

Tips


The DX7 II FDID has been designed for years of trouble-free use. In order to ensure that it remains a healthy member of your family of musical instruments, please keep the following tips in mind:

Installation:
When setting up the DX in your home or studio, avoid exposure to direct sunlight or other sources of heat. Environments with excessive dust, cold, dampness, or vibration can also damage your instrument. Even though the DX is electronic, you should treat it with the same kind of care you would lavish on any other musical instrument.
Also, since the DX is electronic, you should make sure not to set it too close to equipment (such as a television set) that generates electromagnetic fields. Such proximity could cause both malfunctions in the synthesizer's digital circuitry and interference noise in the other unit.

Moving:
When you move your DX, make sure to insert the head protection sheet into the disk drive
- the magnetic head of the drive is very sensitive to vibration, and needs this protection if it is to survive road work.

Handling:
The DX is sturdy, but it can do without rough handling. Don't subject it to sudden jolts (such as dropping it), as this can damage the internal circuitry. If you plan to travel with it, be sure to use a road case. Also, make sure not to apply excessive force to any of the keys, buttons, or other controls.

Cleaning:
To clean or dust your DX, use nothing more than a clean, slightly damp cloth. Using chemical solvents will damage the finish, and using too much water may do considerable damage to the internal circuitry.

AC Power & Other Equipment:
When you are using the DX with an amplifier or mixer that has unbalanced outputs, connect both units to the same AC outlet to avoid hum.
If you use a number of electronic instruments in your setup, you may want to consult an electrician, who can make sure that your system does not overtax the available power.


AC Power & Down Time:
Whenever the DX will not be used for an extended period of time, it is best to protect .it from potential disaster. Electrical storms and other natural or man-made disasters can give rise to power surges, which may damage the digital circuitry of your DX - even if the power is turned off. Either unplug your instrument when not in use, or invest in power strips with surge protectors to safeguard all of your electronic equipment.

Service & Your Warranty:
The DX contains no user-serviceable parts. Opening it up or tampering with it in any way will void the warranty, and may also lead you to experience some nasty electrical shocks. If you have a problem with your instrument, please take it to an authorized Yamaha service center.

Modifications & Your Warranty:
Unless you are assured to the contrary in writing, you should assume that any modifications made to your DX will void the original product warranty. Therefore, you should make sure that you receive a warranty (or some other kind of guarantee) from the person or company that is responsible for the modification.


















































Flip open for
DX7II Reference Diagram


enter PLAY mode
PERFORMANCE button-----.
                              Voice Mode Select buttons Cursor (POLY/MONO & PAN) buttons	Cartridge slot


YAMAHA
II	) hr-F?





LCD di
LED displays

Volume slider ----1+	-- .


"'-GlRT>NSY!ffiESIZEA










Data entry slider	'
(Continuous slider 2)	l
Modulation wheel	'




Breath controller jack


Head phone jack-----

Store button

Edit/Compare button (Enters EDIT mode)

---	Data entry buttons


























	

	













Contents


1	Section 1: Playing the DX7 II FD/D
3	Getting Started
6	Exploring The New Perfonnance Library
10	Exploring The New Voice Library
14	The Play Modes
15	Using Controllers with the DX

17	Section 2: Creating and Storing New Sounds
19	Creating New Sounds
24	Saving New Sounds



.,_,,..

27	Section 3: Using the New Performance Features

29	Perfonnance Edit Buttons
32	Basic Perfonnance Parameters
36	Pan
38	Controllers
40	Micro Tuning

43	Section 4: Using the New Voice Features
45	Voice Edit Buttons
50 Basic Voice Editing Functions
51 New Voice Parameters
53 Controllers
54 Fractional Scaling


C  ...

57	Section 5: Memory Functions
59	Utility Buttons
62	Memory Layout
63	Memory Types
65	Memory Storage Types
67	Basic Utility Functions
68	Cartridge Memory Functions
71	Disk Memory Functions (FD Only)

75	Section 6: MIDI Functions
77	MIDI Buttons
79	System Setup
81 MIDI Data Communications

82 Appendix I: Supplemental Infonnation
83 Appendix 2: Bibliography
84 Appendix 3: MIDI Implementation Chart
85 Blank Voice Data Chart
86 Blank Perfonnance Data Chart













ß(r) iln@rm n
Playing the DX7 II  FD/D
















Contents


3	Getting Started
3 Making Audio Connections
4 Turning On the DX
5 Setting the Volume Slider
5 Setting the Pan and Poly/Mono Buttons

6 Exploring The New Performance Library
6 Selecting the Internal Performance Memories
7 The Internal Performance Memories
8 Selecting the Cartridge Performance Memories
9 The Cartridge Performance Memories

10 Exploring The New Voice Library
10	Selecting the Internal Voice Memories
11	The Internal Voice Memories
12	Selecting the Cartridge Voice Memories
13	The Cartridge Voice Memories

14	The Play Modes
14	Voice Modes and Performance Mode
14	Using the I ~ 32/33 ~ 64 Button
14	Using the A/B Button
14	Using the Poly/Mono Button

15	Using Controllers with the DX
15	Pitch Bend Wheel
15	Modulation Wheel
15	Aftertouch
15	Breath Controller
16	Foot Controllers I and 2
16	Footswitches 1 and 2
16	Continuous Sliders I and 2

Getting Started




     Connecting the DX to a single input
amplifier.


You can begin to enjoy your new DX immediately, without poring through a lot of complicated electronic theory. All you have to do is take the instrument out of it's box and proceed as follows:

Making Audio Connections
There are three different ways to connect the DX to sound reinforcement equipment. The one you choose will depend on your situation:
I. If you have a monophonic (single input) amplifier such as a guitar amp, connect the DX's A/Mix output to the amp's input (using a standard 1/4" cable).



















Using stereo headphones
with the DX.


2. If you are using a multi-channel mixer, connect the DX's two back-panel audio outputs (A/Mix and B) to two of your mixer's inputs (using two 1/4" cables).
3. If you are using a set of standard stereo headphones, plug them into the DX's Phones output.


Turning On the DX
After you have made the audio connection of your choice, tum the DX on by pressing the Power switch located on the right side of the back panel. This is the first display you will see on the main panel:


The DX's "welcome" display.







After a few seconds, this "welcome" display will be replaced by the last Play Mode display selected before the DX was turned off:



initial display.


Setting the Volume Slider
Since the volumes of the various voices differ, start with a setting in the middle of the slider's range; adjust later to suit your taste, depending on the voice or voices being played.


Volume Slider







VOLUME

Setting the Pan and Poly/Mono Buttons
Before you begin to play your new DX, make sure that the settings of the Pan and Poly/Mono buttons are correct for your situation:

To ensure that you are listening to the voices just as they were created, make sure that this light is OFF. If it is ON, press the POLYIMONO button to
turn the light OFF. (The reasons for this will be explained later in this manual.)

If you are using stereo outputs or headphones, make sure that this light is lit.
If it is not, press the PAN button to turn the light ON.
I
If you are using a single (mono) output,
make sure that this light is not lit.
If it is, press the PAN button to turn the light OFF.


    Poly/Mono and Pan Buttons


@
POLY/ MONO	PAN

   Exploring The New Performance
Library


The Performance Mode is a completely new feature for the DX7. It allows you to play two different voices at once, and offers a number of other useful pe,formance-oriented features. These features will be explained in detail in Sections 2 and 3 of this manual. For now, though, just follow the steps below, and explore the richness of the Pe,formance Mode by playing through all of the new sounds available in the Internal and ROM Cartridge memories.

Selecting the Internal Performance Memories













Perfor!'lance	 Dual Internal  I I HT  1 I	Warl'l
I


 : I  IHT 1 I  INT49 I
5 tr i ng	fec ti on

I	I

This portion of the LCD displays the name and number
of the selected Performance memory.

This portion of the LCD
displays the location and number
of the voice or voices used to create the selected Performance memory.


The Internal Performance Memories





Each Performance Name can consist of up to
20 characters;
  each Voice Name can consist of up to JO characters.





















Selecting the Cartridge Performance Memories









The LCD should show this display, with the cursor blinking on the arrow next to the word BANK. If not, press button 15 until this display appears.



The Cartridge Performance Memories






Performance	Name

Voice	A

Voice	B






1
Double French Horns
INT 2
MellowHorn
CRT 37
FrenchHorn
2
Pine Oraan
CRT 3
PioeOraan
CRT 47
PuffOraan
3
Full Electric Piano
INT 5
FullTines
CRT 7
HardTines
4
PickGuitar-SoitFlute
INT 3
PickGuitar
CRT 12
SpitFlute
5
Rotarv Electro Oraan
INT 12
TouchOraan
CRT 21
BriteOrqan
6
SuoerBass-BriahtClav
INT 6
SuperBass
CRT 1
Clavecin
7
MariBUMba
INT 13
Maribumba
CRT 38
StonePhone
8
cs	80 Brass
CRT 15
HardBones
CRT 34
HardTrumps
9
Orqan	Choir
CRT 3
PipeOrqan
CRT 52
FC Choir
10
Church Choir
CRT 10
LadvVox
CRT 57
MaleChoir
11
Celeste and Strinas
INT 58
HallOrch A
CRT 62
Celeste
12
FatBass-HeavvMetal
CRT 43
OwlBass
CRT 55
YesBunk
13
Old School Harmonium
INT 59
HarmoniumA
CRT 53
HarmoniumB
14
Octave MultiDowns
INT 51
LateDown
CRT 16
OctiLate
JS
16
Classical Strinas
CRT 8
Violins
CRT 26
NewOrchest ∑-

Thunder Storm
CRT 23
Thunderon
CRT 61
Explosion
17
Unison Bass
INT 6
SuperBass
CRT 13
BopBass
18
Piano with BC Brass
INT	9
Ebonyivory
CRT 27
BC Trumpet
19
Funky FinqaPicka
INT 33
FinqaPicka


20
-In the Laboratory-
CRT 60
Science


21
PluckSvn-UniSynth
INT 8
Pluk
CRT 22
WhaoSvnth
22
Good Licks
CRT 4
ClaviPluck
CRT 31
Plukatan
23
Dinale Bonas
CRT 9
TinqVoice
CRT 42
RubberGona
24
StrinaPad-Enalishorn
INT 49
Warm Sta B
CRT 25
Enalishorn
25
SnareDrum-Piccolos
CRT 20
Swissnare
CRT 36
Piccolo
26
Inside the VLSI
CRT 14
Glastine A
CRT 33
Glastine B
27
Rubber ElectricPiano
CRT 44
RubbaRoad


28
Old Upriaht Piano
INT 45
Pianoforte



∑-∑∑∑-
29
Tap Electronic Oraan
INT 41
TapOraan
∑-


30
PizziStrinq Section
CRT 45
PizzReverb
CRT 45
PizzReverb
31
Yamaha Motorcycle
CRT 32
KoikeCycle


32
Initialized Memorv
CRT 64
INIT VOICE
CRT 64
INIT VOICE



Exploring The New
Voice
Library


The Voices in the new DX were created using techniques like those used on the original DX7. The new Performance Mode opens up a number of exciting possibilities -many of the Voices in the new DX were created specifically to be used in combinations of two. In addition, there are a number of new features available in Voice mode ( most of them extensions of the Function mode in the original DX7). All of these features will he discussed in detail in Sections 2 and 4 of this manual. For now, though, just follow the steps below, and play through all of the Voices available in the Internal and ROM Cartridge memories.

Selecting the Internal Voice Memories



	
ïThe 1~32/33~64 light will be off, indicating that voices 1~32 are currently selectable. To select voices 33~64, press the 1~32/33~64 button.
The light will go on, indicating that voices 33~64 are currently selectable.

r




The Internal Voice Memories





These are the Voice Memories loaded into the DX when it is shipped from the factory.
Since these memories can be adjusted,
your DX's Internal Memory
,...		may contain different data. t	If so, reload the Internal Voice & Performance
 data from Bank I of the supplied ROM cartridge.
















Selecting the Cartridge Voice Memories



The LCD should show this display, with the cursor !:)linking on the arrow next to the word BANK. If not, press i:)utton 15 until this display appears.



r!



The Cartridge Voice Memories


Bank 1 of the supplied
  ROM cartridge contains the Voice & Performance Memory
loaded into the DX's Internal Memory when it is shipped
        from the factory. Bank 2 contains an entirely different set of Voice & Performance data.























The Play Modes


Now that you have an idea of some of the sound combinations available on the new DX, it is time to take a closer look at how the various Play Modes operate. Read on:





















0	0
VOICE MODE SELECT

\[ SINGLE	]\[ DUAL



































ï






ï
*SPLIT	ll

Voice Modes and Performance Mode
As you have heard from playing through the Performance Memories, it is possible to play two different voices at the same time on the new DX. However, you do not need to be in Performance Mode to try out various combinations of voices. In addition to Performance Play Mode, there are three different Voice Play Modes: Single, Dual, and Split.
Single Mode calls up one voice at a time from the DX 's library of voices, as you learned on page 10 of this manual.
Both Dual and Split involve two voices, A and B. In Dual Mode, both voices are played together, over the entire range of the keyboard. In Split Mode, Voice A is played from the left side of the keyboard, while Voice B is played from the right side of the keyboard.
When you are in the Voice Split Mode (rather than the Performance Split Mode), the Split Point is always set at C3.
To enter Dual or Split Mode, simply press the appropriate Voice Mode button; the light above the selected Voice Mode button will go on. Only one of these Voice Mode lights can be lit at a time. (These lights also show which Voice Mode is selected when you are in the Performance Mode.)
Once you choose the Voice Mode you want to work with, use the I~32/33~64, A/B, and number buttons to select specific voices.
Using the 1 32/33 64 Button	l
The light above the I~32/33~64 button tells you which set of voices can be selected: If the light is off, voices I~32 can be selected using the number buttons; if the light is lit, voices 33~64 can be selected using the number buttons. This holds true for all three Voice Play Modes.




ï
\[A/ B	l\




POLY/ MONO

\[ <]

Using the A/B Button
The light above the A/B button tells you which voice location (A or B) is active for voice selection in Dual and Split modes: If the light is off, Voice A is active, and the voice chosen with the number buttons will be shown as Voice A in the LCD display; if the light is on, Voice B is active, and the voice chosen with the number buttons will be shown as Voice B in the LCD display.

Using the Poly/Mono Button
The light above the Poly/Mono tells you (indirectly) which Key Mode is currently active in Play Mode: If the light is off, the Key Mode remains as programmed; if the light is lit, the opposite Key Mode will be active. Key Modes will be explained further in Section 4.










    Using Controllers with the DX











The DX is desif?ned to operate with many controllers, each of which can be set to pe1form one of a number of different effects. The settings for these controllers can be different for each Voice Memory or Performance Memory. To bef?in your exploration of the expanded musical possibilities available with controllers on the DX, try the examples listed below. Many of you may already be familiar with the operation of the these controllers;for those who are not, each section below bef?ins with instructions on how to locate or attach the controller in question.

Pitch Bend Wheel
The Pitch Bend Wheel is located to the far left of the keyboard. To get an idea of some of the effects possible with the Pitch Bend Wheel, use it with Internal Voice #I or Internal Voice #II. Move the Wheel both quickly and slowly as you play.

Modulation Wheel
The Modulation Wheel is located to the near left of the keyboard (to the right of the Pitch Bend Wheel). For a taste of the possibilities of the Modulation Wheel, try it with Internal Voice #2 or Internal Voice #28.

Aftertouch
Aftertouch is a keyboard feature that gives you extra control over a voice. It is engaged by pushing down on the keys after they have already been depressed. To try some of the effects available with Aftertouch, call up Internal Voice #3 or Internal Voice # I9. After you have played a group of keys, press them down into the key bed and listen to the
result.

Breath Controller



Foot Controllers 1 and 2
The Foot Controllers plug into the two Foot Controller plugs on the back panel of the DX. They can give you continuous control over a number of aspects of the sounds. Try using Foot Controller 1 with Cartridge Voice #47 or Cartridge Voice #52 (from Bank 2 of the ROM). Foot Controller 2 is most often used as a volume pedal, but other effects are possible. Play Internal Voice #4 or Internal Voice #6 while experimenting with Foot Controller 2.

Footswitches 1 and 2
The Footswitches plug into the two Footswitch plugs on the back panel of the DX.
Footswitch I acts much like a sustain pedal on a piano. Try it with Internal Performance
#18 or Internal Performance #21 to get an idea of the different effects that are possible.	∑∑	y ∑ Footswitch 2 can be used to engage a number of effects, including that of the soft pedal on
a piano. Try it in conjunction with Cartridge Performance #27 or Cartridge Performance #28 (from Bank 2 of the ROM).

Continuous Sliders 1 and 2
The Continuous Sliders are located to the right of the Volume Slider on the left side of the DX's front panel. They can be programmed to give you control over many aspects of the timbre of the sounds, and can even be used to alter parameters of a voice in real time. Try using Continuous Slider I with Internal Performance# I or Internal Performance #4. Then listen to the effect that Continuous Slider 2 has on Internal Performance #2 or Internal Performance #5.






















ß(r) illl(O)IID /2
Creating and Storing
New Sounds

Contents


19	Creating New Sounds
19	Editing and Edit Mode
20	Entering Perfonnance Edit Mode
20	Entering Voice Edit Mode
21	Editing Perfonnance and Voice Data
21	Using the Cursor Buttons and the Data Entry Buttons/Slider
21	Edit/Compare
22	Edit Button Quick Reference Guide

24	Saving New Sounds
24	Memory Protection
24	Turning Memory Protect Off
24	Perfonnance Memory
25	Storing Perfonnance Data to Internal or Cartridge Memory
25	Voice Memory
25	Storing Voice Data to Internal or Cartridge Memory










  Creating New Sounds


The Voices and Performance setups in the DX are stored as digital information in a computer-like memory. And, like computer memory, the memory of the DX can be altered for different uses. In other words, voices do not exist as unchangeable presets (as they do in electronic organs), but rather as streams of data. This data can be changed (edited) to create new sounds and Performance setups. To find out how this works, read on.

Editing and Edit Mode
Editing is the process of changing various settings of a Voice or Performance memory. In the DX, this is accomplished in Edit Mode. Usually, you will use Edit Mode to create a new sound or Performance setup, but you can also use it to find out the parameter values for the factory preset Voices and Performance setups.
Most of the buttons on the DX's front panel have multiple functions. You can see this by looking at the way the buttons are labeled on the front panel. For example, the +I button also functions as YES and ON. On most cases, the buttons will have different functions in different operating modes.
The 32 number buttons are no exception: In the Play Modes, they are used to call up various Voice and Performance memories; but, in the Edit Modes, they are used to access the various parameter values that make up a sound.







	


Entering Performance Edit Mode







Entering Voice Edit Mode















VOICE MODE SELECT
l(sn<GLE	)j(	)I(	JI	Press the same button you pressed in
<UAL	  S"-IT	step #1 above to return to Play Mode.

In both of the above procedures, you enter the Edit Mode after the Edit Button is pressed in step #2. At that time, you can push any or all of the buttons indicated (in step #3) as many times as necessary to make the desired edits.
It is possible - even easy - to edit Voice data in the Performance Edit Mode (or Performance data in the Voice Edit Mode). This, however, is NOT a recommended practice, since only Voice data is stored in the Voice Edit Mode, and only Performance data is stored in the Performance Edit Mode.
























The cursor buttons and the data entry slider/buttons.











The Edit/Compare
LED display.

Editing Performance and Voice Data
After entering one of the Edit Modes, use the number buttons to access the parameter whose value you wish to change. Each number button calls up a variety of parameters, often through the use of multiple LCD screen displays. A complete set of these screen displays will be given at the beginning of Section 3 (for Perfonnance Edit Mode) and Section 4 (for Voice Edit Mode). In most cases, each LCD display gives you access to a number of parameters.

Using the Cursor Buttons and the Data Entry Buttons/Slider

Use these buttons to position the LCD cursor next to the parameter you wish to edit. Parameters are listed along the top row of the LCD display, and the cursor should be positioned over the > character pointing to the parameter you wish to edit.

	



Edit/Compare
Once you have started to edit a voice, you can compare your new sound to the original by pressing the Edit/Compare button:

A	B
Once you have changed a value in Edit mode,
this dot will light, indicating that you are now listening to an edited voice.
The LCD will display edited values.

If you press the Edit/Compare button after editing a voice,
---	- the LED number will flash, indicating that you can now play and listen to the original, unedited voice.
LCD values will be those of the original, unedited voice.











Edit Button Quick Reference Guide



Voice parameters are discussed in more detail
in Section 4.


OUTPUT LEVEL


>Scaling Mode
Normal Scaling
>Output Level
>Left Scaling Depth
:,,Left Scaling Curve
>Break Point
>Right Scaling Depth
:,,Right Scaling Curve

Fractional Scaling
>Offset
>Scaling Level for note group









Voice Edit parameters are discussed in
in Section 4.












Performance parameters
are discussed in more detail in Section 3.
















Utility parameters are discussed in more detail
in Section 5.







>Master Tuning
>Interrial Mem1ory Protect
>Cartridge Memory Protect

Micro Tuning



Fractional SC.
Micro Tuning
Voice and Performance
>Bank
>Format

>Format Disk
>Back up Disk
>Free Files on Disk


>Voice Edit
Recall Edit >Performance Edit
> Micro Tuning Edit

Initialize



>Directory
>Save File
>Load File
>Delete File
>Rename File


Cartridge _Files
;,-Directory
>Save File
>Load File
>Delete File
>Rename File
>Cartridge Bank


MOR Files
>Directory
>File In
>File Out
>Delete File
:>Rename File















     Saving New Sounds


Once you have altered a particular Voice or Pe,formance memory to your liking, you will want to save your new data in one of the DX's memory locations. Single Voice memories and single Pe,formance setups can be saved either to the Internal Memory or to a RAM Cartridge Memory. To do so, proceed as follows:

Memory Protection
Each time the DX is turned on, it automatically powers up with both the Internal and the Cartridge Memory Protect feature turned on. Before you can save data, you must tum off this automatic memory protection.

Turning Memory Protect Off







Performance Memory
Do not try to edit Performance data while in Voice Edit Mode. If you do, you will hear and see the Performance edits, but they will not be stored as part of memory when you store the Voice data.








∑ 24 -










Storing Performance Data to Internal or Cartridge Memory

  PLAY	
l]	\(rERFORMflNC l Press the Performance button.

.
I(INTERNAL  )I Press the Internal button or the Cartridge button to select the storage
	o,	area for your edited Performance data. NOTE: If you wish to save the
Performance data to a RAM cartridge, make sure that a properly
I(CASTR,OGE )I formatted Cartridge (DX7-2) is inserted .in the cartridge port.

.

	EGCOPY	
I(STORE	)I Press and hold the.Store button.
I(	33	~ 1(	..)I While holding the Store button, use the number buttons
v	1	ll	32	to select the memory location for your edited Perform-
ance data. The LCD will echo your choice.
.∑ ∑.	.
	YES	
(r) I(ï'-ON	)I While still holding the Store button, press the+1/YES button.

Voice Memory
Do not try to edit Voice data while in Perfonnance Edit Mode. If you do, you will hear and see the Voice edits, but they will not be stored as part of memory when you store the Perfonnance Data.

Storing Voice Data to Internal or Cartridge Memory


VOICE MODE SELECT
l]	I(SINGLE	ll( WAL	ll(SPUT	ll  Press one of the Voice Mode buttons.
.


!(INTERNAL  )I Press the Internal button or the Cartridge button to select the storage
	o,	area for your edited Voice data. NOTE: If you wish to save the Voice
data to a RAM cartridge, make sure that a properly formatted Cartridge
I(CARTR>OGE )I (DX7-2) is inserted in the cartridge port.

	EG COPY	
I(STORE	)I Press and hold the Store button.
While holding the Store button, use the number buttons
/v41	I( 1	"ll  ~ 1(32   ")I (and the 1-32/33-64 button if necessary) to select the will
memory location for your edited Voice data. The LCD

echo your choice.
  YES	
(r),	l(ï'-ON	ll  While still holding the Store button, press the+1/YES button.



- 25 -

























ß an@IID]
      Using the New Performance Features










Contents


29	Performance Edit Buttons
29	Button 27 LCD Displays
30	Button 28 LCD Displays
31	Button 29 LCD Displays
31	Button 30 LCD Displays

32	Basic Performance Parameters
32	Total Volume
32	Balance
32	Dual Detune
33	Split Point
33	Note Shift
34	EG Forced Damp
35	Performance Name

36	Pan
36	Basic Pan Function
36	Pan Modes
37	PanEG

38	Controllers
38	Sustain Footswitch (FS I)
38	Footswitch 2 (FS 2)
39	Continuous Sliders
39	FM Parameters Assignable to CS I and CS2

40	Micro Tuning
40	Selecting a Micro Tuning
40	The Micro Tuning Presets
40	Micro Tuning Editing and Storage










Performance Edit Buttons


All of the Performance Mode parameters are adjusted via the LCD displays called up using buttons 27 ~ 30. All of the these buttons call up multiple LCD displays. The charts below show all of the displays called up by each button, and provide a complete list of parameters and value ranges. In some cases, the first LCD display in a chart may not be the first one you see. You may need to cycle through the displays (by pressing the button repeatedly) until you reach the desired LCD display.


Button 27 LCD Displays

>A
Bank A /off. on/
>B
Bank B /off, on/


>Select
Select (Sustain, Portamento, Key hold, Solt)
>A
Bank A /off, on)
>B
Bank B /off. on)
>Ran9e
Soft Range /0 - 7)

>Select
Select (see Select Table)
>A
Bank A /off, on)
>B
Bank B /off, on)


>Select
Select (see Select Table)
>A
Bank A /off, on/
>B
Bank B /off, on)











Button 28 LCD Displays

VOICE MODE
>Uoice Mode
Voice Mode  (single, dual, split)




>Total uoluMe
OR	99

>Total uoluMe
Total Volume /0 - 99)





>Uoice Mode
Voice Mode  (single, dual, split)




>Total uoluMe
Total Volume /0-99)
>Balance
Balance (-50 to +50)


>Dual detune
Dual Detune (0 - 7)







>Uoice Mode
Voice Mode  (single, dual, split)



>Total uoluMe
Total Volume {0-99)
>Balance
Balance (-50 to +50)



>Split Point
Split Point (C-2 to GB by half steps)










Button 29 LCD Displays









Button 30 LCD Displays

>Table Select
Tuning Tabla (Preset 1-11, User 1-2, Cart 1-63)
>A
Tabla Bank Switch (off, on)
>B
Tabla Bank Switch (off, on)

>EG forced daMP
EG Forced Damping (off, on)


>A
Bank Note Shift (-24 to +24)
>B
Bank Note Shift (-24 to +24)


>PerforMance naMe
Performance Name (20 character name)













>Mode
Pan Mode (0 - 3)











       Basic Performance Parameters


Accessed using buttons 28 and 29, these parameters determine the basic voice relationships in Performance Mode.

Total Volume
This parameter allows you to set an overall volume for each Performance memory. If you desire, you can use this setting to balance the levels of your Performance memories, so that constant Volume Slider or mixer adjustments are not necessary.

Balance
This parameter adjusts the relative volume of the two voices in Dual and Split Modes:
g j  Voice A	VoiceB




-50	0
,.,'( ∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑..∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑	Balance Setting

+50
.	J,∑∑I




Dual Detune
This parameters shifts the pitch of both voices in Dual and Split Modes. Each voice is shifted an equal amount. Voice A is shifted up, and Voice B is shifted down:
Dual Detune	ï

Dual Detune settings and their effect
on Voice A and Voice B.

+1/4
step ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ ∑

Setting


.........
Original+----
Pitch	L-'-lt?I



∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑......................
-1/4 ........................................
step









Split Point
In Perfonnance Mode, the Split Point is adjustable, and is memorized as part of the Perfonnance Memory. The Split Point can be selected using the Data Entry Slider/Buttons or the keyboard: The first note played on the keyboard after accessing the Split Point parameter will be entered as the Split Point in the LCD display.


The Split Point is adjustable in Performance Mode.














Note Shift
This parameter allows you to adjust the transposition of each voice in Dual and Split Modes. Each voice may be adjusted up or down as much as two octaves (in halfsteps). The original transposition of each voice is retained as part of the Voice memory, and the the Note Shift value is added to or subtracted from that Voice setting when you are in Perfonnance Mode.









EG Forced Damp
Even though the DX is a 16-voice synthesizer, these voices can be used up quickly whel) you are in Dual Mode (or when you use a Sustain Footswitch pedal). When you do exceed the DX's note capacity, the first notes played will stop sounding to make way for the new notes being played.
Under normal operating conditions, the DX considers these new notes to be continuations of the first notes; therefore, the initial portions of the attack envelope will not be retriggered:


Under normal conditions,
the DX's envelope acts this way.


EG Forced Damping Off
	,,
This part of the attack- '	
is not reproduced	, /


First note	9th note*



If you wish to avoid this effect, tum the Forced Damping function on. It will force the envelope to retrigger for each new note played:



Using the EG Forced Damping parameter, the envelope is farced to retrigger itself for each new note played.

EG Forced Damping On

First note	9th note*




* 17th note in the case of single play mode.









Performance Name
You can enter a Performance Name of up to 20 characters. To do so, follow the instructions below.


   Since you have a total of twenty characters to define your Performance Memory, make sure that your Performance Name conveys the basic approach of the specific Performance Memory
immediately.












PO..Y I MONO	PAN	Using the left and right cursor buttons while holding the
Jr<l 	lK	C>ll	Edit/Character button lets you to place the cursor over
a specific character position. This allows you to easily
edit any character within a name.
I(CAATRIOOE ll	Pressing the Cartridge button selects UPPER CASE (capital) letters.
J("TESNAL )I	Pressing the Internal button selects lower case letters.

Pan







Pan Modes are operative only if you are using both
of the DX's audio output jacks.


The Pan features represent an entirely new class of Performance controls for the DX. Accessed using button 30, these parameters provide control over the stereo image of the instrument's output.

Basic Pan Functions
In order for Pan effects to operate, you must connect both of the audio outputs on the DX's back panel. In addition, the light over the Pan button must be lit - if it is not, the Pan function is turned off. Pan can be turned on and off only in one of the Play Modes. (In Edit Mode, the Pan button becomes one of the cursor buttons.)
There are four basic Pan Modes. Mode 0 can be used with all Voice Modes, while Modes 1 ~ 3 operate only in Dual and Split Modes.

Pan Modes








If you select Pan Mode 0, the output of the two voices in Dual or Split Modes is combined, and the location of the sound in the stereo panorama is determined by the Pan effect selected. If you select Pan Modes 1 ~ 3, the two voice outputs remain separated, and the relative level of the two voices is determined by the Pan/Level effect selected.
There are three basic types of Pan/Level effects: LFO, Velocity, and Note Number. Each one opens up a number of possibilities:
If LFO is selected, the Pan/Level effect will be controlled by the Voice LFO (the LFO of Voice A in Dual or Split Modes). If you are operating in Pan Mode 0, the LFO controls the position of the audio output in the stereo mix; if you are operating in Pan Modes 1 ~ 3, the LFO controls the level of the selected voices (both, A, or B).
If Velocity is selected, the Pan/Level effect will be controlled by the force of your keyboard touch. If you are operating in Pan Mode 0, Velocity controls the position of the audio output in the stereo mix: Softer touches (slower velocities) will position the sound more in output jack A, while stronger touches (faster velocities) will position the sound more in output jack B. If you are operating in Pan Modes 1 ~ 3, Velocity controls the output volume of the selected voices (both, A, or B).


If Key Number is selected, the Pan/Level effect will be controlled by the right/left position of keys played on the keyboard. If you are operating in Pan Mode 0, Key Number controls the position of the audio output in the stereo mix: Notes played to the left of C3 will position the sound more in output jack A, while notes played to the right of C3 will position the sound more in output jack B. If you are operating in Pan Modes 1 ~ 3, Key Number controls the output volume of the selected voices (both, A, or B).
The overall depth (intensity) of these Pan/Level effects is controlled by the Range parameter.
Please note that all of these Pan/Level effects are global, rather than note by note: Each new Velocity input or Key Number input will reposition the audio (or readjust the output) of all notes currently sounding.

PanEG
The Pan EG allows you to create an envelope for automatic control of Pan (Pan Mode 0) or Level (Pan Modes 1 ~ 3):




Representative Pan Envelope
Generator shape.


99

Output B (right)

Key on



50

Output A (left)

Time


0	L4	L4

Controllers

The DX features a greatly expanded set of controller options. The settings for Footswitches I and 2 and Continuous Sliders I and 2 are adjusted in Pe,formance Edit Mode, using button 27. (The other controller settings are accessed in Voice Edit Mode.)

Sustain Footswitch (FS 1)
Footswitch I is set to operate as a Sustain pedal. In Dual and Split Modes, FS I can be selected to affect Voice A, Voice B, or both.


Footswitch 2 (FS 2)
Footswitch 2 is a multi-purpose pedal with four selectable functions: Sustain, Portamento,	Th
Key Hold, or Soft.
If Sustain is selected, FS 2 operates as a Sustain pedal Uust like FS I).	tJ"
If Portamento is selected, Voice Portamento effects will operate only when the pedal is depressed.
If Key Hold is selected, only notes that are being held when the pedal is engaged will sustain. This effect is similar to a piano's sostenuto pedal.
If Soft is engaged, the pedal will soften the timbre and volume of the sound, to a degree determined by the Range parameter.
In Dual and Split Modes, FS 2 can be selected to affect Voice A, Voice B, or both.




















The Continuous Sliders provide a new avenue for exploration of real-time timbral control.


Continuous Sliders
The two Continuous Sliders give you access to real-time control of FM Voice parameters. There are a total of 105 different possibilities:

FM Parameters Assignable to CS 1 and CS2

DATA ENTRY slider highest position







ïOP6  EG Level 3 (L3)
I
OP 1
ïOP6  EG Level 2 (L2)
I
OP 1
ïOP 6  EG Level 1 (L1)
I
OP 1
ïOP6  EG Rate 4 (R4)
I
OP 1
ïOP 6  EG Rate 3 (R3)
I
OP 1
ïOP 6  EG Rate 2 (R2)
I
OP 1




lowest position

ïPortamento time
ï Pitch EG Level 4
I
Level 1
ï Pitch EG Rate 4
I
Rate 1
ïLFO AMD
PMD PMS
Delay Speed Wave
ï Feedback level
ïAlgorithm
ï Dual detune
ïPAN select
ïOutput balance (A/B)
ïTotal volume
ïNo effect



In Dual and Split Modes, CS l and CS 2 can be selected to affect Voice A, Voice B, or both.

Micro Tuning







  The new DX contains eleven preset Intonations, which should provide you with a good introduction to possibilities
of alternate intonation schemes.


Micro Tuning is another new feature for the DX. It offers the possibility of pe,forming music using tuning and intonation systems other than Equal Temperament (which is the current standard tuning for both pianos and synthesizers). Micro Tuning data is accessed using button 29. New Micro Tunings are created in Micro Tuning Edit Mode, which is accessed using button 14 in conjunction with button 29.

Selecting a Micro Tuning
The DX is equipped with eleven preset Micro Tunings as part of its pennanent memory. In order to hear the sound of these presets, it is necessary to tum Micro Tuning on for Voice A, Voice B, or both (using the A and B parameters in the Micro Tuning LCD display). When Micro Tuning is not on, the DX automatically operates in Equal Temperament.

The Micro Tuning Presets

1
Equal Temperament
2
Pure (Maior)
3
Pure (Minor)
4
Mean tone
5
Pythaqorean
6
Werckmeister
7
Kirnberqer
8
Vallotti & Young
9
1/4 Shifted equal
10
1/4 Tone
11
1/8 Tone

In presets 2 ~ 5, the tuning can be adjusted according to the key of the music being played.

Micro Tuning Editing and Storage
If you are interested in alternate tunings and intonations, you may want to create your own sets of Micro Tuning data. The DX provides two memory locations for this purpose: User 1 and User 2. These two sets of data are stored as part of the Internal Memory, and will be stored along with all other Internal data when the Internal Voice & Perfonnance Memory is saved to another storage medium (such as RAM cartridge or disk). In addition, up to 63 Micro Tunings can be saved to RAM cartridge that has been properly fonnatted for that purpose.









 Entering the Micro Tuning Edit Mode













Micro Tuning
Data












l]

EGCOPY
I(STORE	JI Press and hold the Store button.

\( NTERNAL  JI Use the Internal or Cartridge button to select the desired memory location, The LCD will echo your choice. NOTE: If you wish to save
Of..	theMicro Tuning data to a RAM cartrid9e, make sure that a properly

I(CARTRIDGE JI formatted Cartridge (MTT-Y) is inserte in the cartridge port.


.
	 Use the number buttons (and the 1~32/33~64 button it
I(,	33JI--1(32	"JI necessary) to choose the desired location for your Micro
Tuning data: 1~2 in Internal memory or 1~631n Cartridge
memory.





.

	YES	
1(ï1/0N	JI While still holding the Store button, press the +1/YES button.

--






















ß(r) an@IID
Using the New Voice Features

Contents


45	Voice Edit Buttons
45	Button 7 LCD Display
45	Button 8 LCD Display
45	Button 9 LCD Display
46	Button 10 LCD Displays
46	Button 11 LCD Display
47	Button 12 LCD Display
47	Button 13 LCD Display
47	Button 23 LCD Displays
48	Button 24 LCD Displays
48	Button 25 LCD Displays
49	Button 26 LCD Displays

50	Basic Voice Editing Functions
50	Operator Select
50	Operator On/Off
50	EG Copy

51	New Voice Parameters
51	Pitch Envelope
51	LFO
52	Key Modes

53	Controllers
53	Function Data and Voice Effect Data
53	Pitch Bend Modes
53	Foot Controller I


54	Fractional Scaling
54	Fractional Scaling and Level Scaling
54	Fractional Scaling Editing and Storage









     Voice Edit Buttons


All of the Voice Mode parameters are adjusted via the LCD displays called up using buttons 7 ~ 13 and 23 ~ 26. Many of the these buttons call up multiple LCD displays. The charts below show all of the displays called up by each button, and provide a complete list of parameters and value ranges. in some cases, the first LCD display in a chart may
not be the first one you see. You may need to cycle through the displays (by pressing the button repeatedly) until you reach the desired LCD display.


Button 7 LCD Display



ALGORITHM
[ 7	39]

∑r-'-2===2i..=222222±22.:±±±c:!;r  >Al9
>Fbl
Feedback Level /0 ï 7)
>Osc. s1.1nc
Oscillator Sync (off, on)

>Transpose
Transpose (mid C ï Ct to CS)
>Uoice naMe
Voice Name /10 character name)











OSCILLATOR

Button 8 LCD Display


OP!	Osc	>Mode al915 111111 fixed









Button 9 LCD Display




>Coarse>Fine >Detune
1.620Hz:	+0



>Mode
Oscillator Mode (ratio, fixed)
>Coarse
Coarse Frequency (varies)
>Fine
Fine Frequency (varies)
>Detune
Oscillator Detune (-7 to +7)












>Rs
Rate Scaling /0 ï 7)
>R 1 >R2 >R3 >R4
Operator Envelope Rates 1 - 4 /0 . 99)
>Ll >L2 >L3 >Li
Operator Envelope Levels 1 ï 4 /0 ï99)


Button 10 LCD Displays


OUTPUT
 LEVEL 

	>Scaling Mode
Scaling Mode (normal, fractional)
>Scaling Mode








OR



















Button 11 LCD Display

>Level
Operator Output Level (0 - 99)
>Ld
Left Scaling Depth (0 - 99)
>Le
Left Scaling Curve (-fin, -exp, +exp, +fin)
>BP
Break Point (A-1 to CB by half steps)
>Re
Right Scaling Curve (-fin, -exp, +exp, +fin)
>Rd	
Right Scaling Depth (0 - 99)



>Scaling Mode
Scaling Mode (normal, fractional)
>Ofst
Fractional Scaling Offset(-127 to +127)
> C-2-+
Scaling Level for key range (0 -255)







ï
>UelocitY
Velocity Sensitivity /0- 7)
>AMS
Amplitude Modulation Sensitivity (0 ï 7)
>PMs(all OP)
Pitch Modulation Sensitivity /0 ï 7)











Button 12 LCD Display











Button 13 LCD Display


>Wave
LFO Waveshape
(triangle, saw down, saw up,
square, sine, s/hold)
>Speed
LFO Speed /0 - 99)
>Delay
Delay before LFO begins /0 - 99)
>Mode
LFO Mode (single, multi)
>PMd
Pitch Modulation Depth /0 - 99)
>AMd
Amplitude Modulation Depth /0 - 99)
>Sync
LFO Sync (off, on)





>Rn9

>Uel
Velocity (off, on)
>Rs
Rate Scaling /0∑ 7)
>R 1 >R2 >R3 >R4
Pitch Envelope Rates 1 - 4 /0 ï 99)
>Ll >L2 >L3 >L4
Pitch Envelope Levels 1 - 4 /0 - 99)















Button 24 LCD Displays

RandoM Pitch >DePth
1












Button 25 LCD Displays



>Ran9e
Pitch Bend Range /0 ï 12)
>Step
Pitch Bend Step Range /0 ∑ 12)
>Mode
Pitch Bend Mode (normal, low, high, key on)

>tlode
Portamento Mode
(sus-key p retain, sus-key p follow)
>SteP
Portamento Step Range /0-12)
>TiMe
Portamento Time /0-12)

>DePth
Random Pitch Depth /0 -7)










>PMod
Pitch Modulation  /0. 99)
>AMod
Amplitude Modulation  /0 ï 99)
>EGbias
Envelope Generator Bias /0-99)
>Pblas
Pitch Bias /-50 to +SO)


>PMod
Pitch Modulation  /0. 99)
>AMod
Amplitude Modulation  /0. 99)
>EGbias
Envelope Generator Bias /0.99)
>Pbias
Pitch Bias /∑50 to +SO)

>PMod
Pitch Modulation  /0. 99)
>AMod
Amplitude Modulation /0 ï99)
>EGbias
Envelope Generator Bias (0. 99)









Button 26 LCD Displays

>CS!
Control Slider 1 (off, on)
>PMod
Pitch Modulation (0 - 99)
>AMod
Amplitude Modulation (0 - 99)
>EGbias
Envelope Generator Bias (0 ï 99)
>Uol
Volume {O - 99)

>PMod
Pitch Modulation (0 - 99)
>AMod
Amplitude Modulation (0 - 99)
>EGb las
Envelope Generator Bias (0 - 99)
>UoI
Volume (0-99)

>PMod
Pitch Modulation (0 - 99)
>AMod
Amplitude Modulation  (0 - 99)
>EGbias
Envelope Generator Bias (0 - 99)
>Uol
Volume {O ∑ 99)

       Basic Voice Editing Functions






   Voice editing is much easier on the new DX, thanks to the expanded LCD display and the direct operator access provided by buttons I~ 6 and 17 ~ 22.


The new DX offers an expanded LCD display, which makes Voice editing much easier than it was with the original DX7. A number of other basic Edit operations have also been simplified, as follows:

Operator Select
The parameters accessed using buttons 8 ~ 11 are adjustable for each of the six operators. In Voice Edit Mode, buttons I ~ 6 provide a quick way to move from one operator to another.

Operator On/Off
In order to adjust the settings for the six operators accurately, it is useful to focus on the sound of certain operators by turning off the output of ones not being edited. In Voice Edit Mode, buttons 17 ~ 22 provide a quick way to tum the six operators on and off.













EG Copy
The EG Copy function from the original DX7 is retained in the new DX, and is made easier through the use of buttons 1 ~ 6. Once you have Envelope data you want to copy displayed in the LCD, simply press and hold the Store/EG Copy button. You can then choose the copy destination using buttons 1 ~ 6.






- so -

      New Voice Parameters








Representative Pitch Envelope
Generator shape.


The basic Voice of the new DX is almost exactly the same as that of the original DX7, assuring complete compatibility between the old and new instruments. To discover the additional Voice parameters of the new DX, read on.

Pitch Envelope
The Pitch Envelope operates as it did in the original DX7, but some new features have been added. The potential depth of the Pitch Envelope effect can now be adjusted using the Range parameter:


RNG
Maximum Pitch
Chanae Ranae
1/2
6 semitones
1
1 octave
2
2 octaves
8
8 octaves





L4

In addition, the Velocity parameter allows you to control the intensity of the Pitch Envelope with keyboard touch.

LFO
There was only one LFO in the original DX7, so all voices were affected in exactly the same way by the LFO settings. In the new DX, there are sixteen LFOs, one for each voice. Even though all sixteen LFOs must have the same settings, they can now operate independently of each other if the LFO Mode parameter is set to Multi. If Mode is set to Single, the LFO will operate as it did in the original DX7.








- 51 -


Key Modes
The new DX offers two Unison Key Modes, which create "fatter" sounds. Since these new Modes use more than one note of the DX's sixteen-note capacity, they will affect the total number of notes available at any one time:

 Key Mode
Voice Mode

Single
Dual
Split
Polyphonic
16
8
8+8
Monophonic
1
1
1 + 1
Unison poly
4
2
2+2
Unison mono
1
1
1 + 1


In Split Mode, the actual number of voices available will depend on the settings for the two voices involved. For example, if Voice A is set to Polyphonic and Voice B is set for Unison poly, a total of IO notes can be played simultaneously (8 for Voice A and 2 for Voice B).



























- 52 -

Controllers











Pitch Bend Modes on the new DX.


The new DX features an expanded set of controller options. The settings for Pitch Bend Wheel, Modulation Wheel, Aftertouch, Breath Controller, and Foot Controllers 1 and 2 are adjusted in Voice Edit Mode, using buttons 24 ~ 26.(The other controller settings are accessed in Performance Edit Mode.)

Function Data and Voice Effect Data
The original DX7 separated its operational parameters into two groups: Voice data and Function data. Voice data encompassed all parameters used to create a Voice, and Function data involved settings for the various performance Controllers. The DX7 only had memory to store one set of Function settings, so all Controllers operated in the same way for all Voices.
In the new DX, Function data has been replaced by Voice Effect data (adjusted using buttons 23 ~ 26). This Voice Effect data can be adjusted as part of each Voice Memory - this means that each Voice can have its own Controller settings.
Most of the Voice Effect parameters are exactly the same as the Function parameters of the original DX7. The new parameters are outlined below.

Pitch Bend Modes
The Pitch Bend Wheel in the new DX functions in one of four basic Modes, which operate as follows:


Pitch Bend Mode
Chord notes affected
    Applied to sound sustained by foot switch?
Normal
all notes
yes
Low
lowest note only
ves
High
highest note only
yes
Kevon
all notes
no




Foot Controller 1
The new DX provides memory space to set the operation of two Foot Controllers. Foot Controller 1 also has a new parameter possibility: It can be set to control the same Voice parameter as that of Continuous Slider 1. (For more on the available settings for CS I, see Section 3 of this manual.) Since CS I operates in Performance Mode, this use of Foot Controller I is also confined to Performance Mode.




- 53 -

Fractional
Scaling





Fractional Scaling allows you to adjust the output level
    of each operator for three-note groups.











        Entering Fractional Scaling
Edit Mode


One of the most important aspects of DX7 voicing is Level Scaling, which allows adjustment of each operator's output over the range of the keyboard. The new DX offers the possibility of even more subtle control over operator outputs, through Fractional Scaling.

Fractional Scaling and Level Scaling
Although the DX7 's Level Scaling offers a great deal of interaction between timbre and frequency, Fractional Scaling offers even greater precision: The level can be set independently in groups of three notes, over the entire range of the keyboard. To provide even more control, the resolution of the level settings has been expanded from O ~ 99 to 0 ~ 255:






Fractional Scaling Editing and Storage



- 54 -











        Editing Fractional Scaling
Data





















        Storing Fractional Scaling
Data
























ß(E; Ull(Q)IID ß
Memory Functions

Contents

59	Utility Buttons
59	Button 14 LCD Displays
60	Button 15 LCD Displays
61	Button 16 LCD Displays

62	Memory Layout
63	Memory Types
63	Voice & Performance Memory
63	System Setup Memory
63	Micro Tuning Memory
63	Fractional Scaling Memory
63 Initialized Memory
64 Current Play/Edit Memory
64 Compare/Recall Memory

65 Memory Storage Types
65 Internal Memory
65 Cartridge Memory
66 ROM Cartridge
66 Disk Memory (FD Only)

67 Basic Utility Functions
67 Master Tune
67 Recall Edit
67 Initialize

68 Cartridge Memory Functions
68 Using Cartridge Data
69 Formatting a RAM Cartridge
70 Loading Voice & Performance Data from a RAM Cartridge

71 Disk Memory Functions (FD Only)
71 Using and Handling Disks
72 Basic Disk Drive Operations
74	DiskMDR


.,.


t ï









Utility Buttons


All of the Memory functions (and related utility functions) are adjusted via the LCD displays called up using buttons 14 ~ 16. All of the these buttons call up multiple LCD displays. The charts below show all of the displays called up by each button, and provide a complete list of parameters and value ranges. In some cases, the first LCD display in a chart may not be the first one you see. You may need to cycle through the displays ( by pressing the button repeatedly) until you reach the desired LCD display.




Button 14 LCD Displays







>Master tunin9
Master Tuning (-64 to +63)
>INT
Internal Memory Protect (off. on)
>CRT
Cartridge Memory Protect /off, on)


>Coarse
Coarse Frequency (C#-2 to G8 by half stops)
>Fine
Fine Frequency (-42 to +42)


>Uoice
Recall Voice Edit
>Per f.
Recall Performance Edit
>Micro tunin9
Recall Micro Tuning Edit


>UoiceA
Initialize Voice Bank A
>UoiceB
Initialize Voice Bank 8
>Per forMance
Initialize Performance

r






Button 15 LCD Displays



>Saue
Save to Cartridge
>Load
Load from Cartridge


>Bank
Bank /1 - 4)
>ForMat
Format (DXl-2, FKS-Y, MTT- l-'.)


>Bank
Bank /1 -4)
>ForMat
Format (DXl-2, FKS-Y, MTT-l-'./


>Bank
Bank /1 - 4)
>ForMat
Format (DXl-2, FKS- Y, MTT- Y)


















>Forriat
Format Disk
>Back UP
Back Up Disk
>Free bytes
Free Files On Disk // - 44)





Button 16 LCD Displays




>Dir
Internal Files Directory
>Saue
Save Internal File
>Load
Load Internal File
>Del
Delete Internal File
>Renarie
Rename Internal File


>Dir
Cartridge Files Directory
>Saue
Save Cartridge File
>Load
Load Cartridge File
>Del
Delete Cartridge File
>Renarie
Rename Cartridge File
>Bank
Cartridge Bank /1 - 4)



>Dir
MOR Files Directory
>In
MOR File In
>Out
MOR File Out
>Del
Delete MOR File
>Renarie
Rename MOR File

Memory Layout















Disk






Cartridge






Internal Memory








Current Play/ Edit Memory





    Compare/ Recall Memory









Memory Types


As you can see from the diagram on the facing page, there are many facets to the Memory layout of the new DX. To understand all of these types of memory, study the diagram and read the explanation below:

Voice & Performance Memory
This Memory block includes data for 64 Voice Memories and 32 Performance Memories, plus one System Setup Memory and two User-defined Micro Tunings.

System Setup Memory
System Setup Memory contains a number of basic MIDI settings, plus Master Tuning and Cartridge Bank number settings. System Setup is always retained in Internal Memory, along with the Voice & Performance Memory and the two User-defined Micro Tunings. For more information on System Setup Memory, see Section 6 of this manual.

Micro Tuning Memory
The DX contains eleven Micro Tunings as part of its permanent memory. In addition, two User-defined Micro Tunings are stored as part of Voice & Performance Memory. Using a RAM cartridge, it is also possible to store up to 63 Micro Tuning Memories.

Fractional Scaling Memory
Fractional Scaling data cannot be stored in the DX's Internal Memory. In order to use Fractional Scaling data with Internal Voice Memories, the data must reside in a RAM (or ROM) cartridge installed in the DX's cartridge port.

Initialized Memory
For those who wish to create Voice Memories or Performance Memories from scratch, the DX provides both Voice and Performance "blank Page" data as part of its permanent memory. If you want to start from ground zero (instead of working from an already≠ existing Voice or Performance Memory), call up the DX's Init Voice or Init Performance data (using button 14 in Edit Mode).

r






Current Play/Edit Memory
Whenever you call up a Voice Memory or Performance Memory in Play Mode, you are actually sending it to a special location in the DX -	the current Play/Edit Memory. As the name indicates, this is also the location where Voice or Performance data is edited. In computer terminology, this memory location is often called the Edit Buffer.

Compare/Recall Memory
When you are editing a Voice and use the Edit/Compare feature, the original Voice data is loaded into the Play/Edit Memory (so you can hear it). The edited Voice data is moved temporarily into another memory location, the Compare/Recall Memory. In computer terms, this memory location might be called the Compare Buffer. When you engage the Recall Edit function for the various Internal Memory types, you are actually recalling the last data moved to the Compare/Recall Memory.









    Memory Storage Types










   The RAM4 cartridge can be used to store one
of three possible kinds of data.


In addition to having a number of distinct types of memory, the new DX offers a number of ways to store these various memories. To understand how the various memory storage possibilities interact, read on.

Internal Memory
The DX's Internal Memory holds a standard Voice & Performance Memory block, which consists of the following: 64 Voice Memories, 32 Performance Memories, I System Setup Memory, and 2 User-defined Micro Tuning Memories. Voice & Performance Memory can also be stored in Cartridge Memory or in Disk Memory.

Cartridge Memory
A DX RAM4 cartridge can store three different types of data: Voice & Performance, Fractional Scaling, and Micro Tuning.
The RAM Voice & Performance Memory is equivalent to the Internal Voice &
Performance Memory.
The RAM Fractional Scaling Memory holds up to 64 Fractional Scalings, which are tied to the 64 Voices in the DX's Internal Memory.
The RAM Micro Tuning Memory holds up to 63 Micro Tunings.

Possible RAM4 Contents















Each of these kinds of Memory can be stored from cartridge to disk (FD only).


ROM Cartridge
The supplied ROM cartridge contains 4 banks, which can be accessed using button I5 in Edit Mode:

Contents of Supplied ROM Cartridge

The supplied ROM cartridge holds a number of different kinds of DX memory.




I
i
I









ï may all be equal tempered data


Disk Memory (FD Only)
Disk memory can be used to store the following: Voice & Performance Memories from the DX's Internal Memory; Voice & Performance, Fractional Scaling, or Micro Tuning Memories from Cartridge Memory; and MIDI data from an external unit via the DX's MIDI ports.

7






Basic Utility Functions


Most of the basic Internal Memory Utility functions are accessed using button 14 in Edit Mode, as follows:

Master Tune
This sets the tuning of the DX relative to its internal A-440 reference. This setting is stored as part of the DX's System Setup Memory.

Recall Edit
These functions can be used to recall Voice, Performance, or Micro Tuning data from the DX's Compare/Recall Memory.

Initialize
These functions can be used to call up the DX's Initialized Voice or Performance Memories, if you wish to create Voice or Performance data from scratch.








Cartridge Memory Functions






  LCD display indicating that required Fractional Scaling or
   Micro Tuning data is not available. When
the needed data is supplied via a RAM cartridge, these displays disappear.


RAM cartridges are useful storage centers for Voice & Performance data. In addition, they are the only storage source from which Fractional Scaling data and Micro Tuning data can be accessed for immediate use with DX Internal Voice & Performance data. To understand the basic Cartridge Utility functions, read on.

Using Cartridge Data
Except for the two User-defined Micro Tunings that are part of the DX's Internal Voice & Performance Memory, Cartridge Memory is the only location from which Fractional Scaling and Micro Tuning data may be recalled for immediate use. Fractional Scaling data and Micro Tuning data can be stored on disk, but cannot be used directly with Internal Memory from disk: In order to interact with Internal Voice & Performance data,
Fractional Scaling and Micro Tuning data must reside in a cartridge plugged into the DX 's
Cartridge port. If you create Voice or Performance data that involves Cartridge Memory (for either Fractional Scaling or Micro Tuning), the DX will remind you as follows:


This symbol si9nifies that the indicated Voice Memory
was created with Fractional Scaling, but the RAM cartridge with the necessary Fractional Scaling data is not inserted in the instrument's cartridge port.


This symbol signifies that the indicated Performance memory was created to include Micro Tuning from a RAM cartridge, but the RAM cartrid9e with the necessary Micro Tuning
data is not inserted in the instrument's cartridge port.









Formatting a RAM Cartridge







Loading Voice & Performance Data from a RAM Cartridge











ï 











'If you answer NO, you are telling the DX to load the RAM Cartridge data with 'System Setup data. If you answer YES, you are telling the DX to load the RAM 'Cartridge without System Setup data.

l



Disk Memory Functions (FD Only)


The FD's disk drive is capable of storing any information that resides in the DX's Internal Memory or Cartridge Memory. In order to access this data for pe,formance, it must be loaded into the DX's Internal or Cartridge Memory- the disk drive only operates as a storage medium.

Using and Handling Disks
The DX7 II FD uses 3.5" micro floppy disks. These disks have a Memory Protect function that is similar to that of the RAM4 cartridge:



Disk Memory Protect Switch
ï	ï
ON

 OFF




Even though 3.5" disks are relatively sturdy, you should handle them with care when inserting them into or removing them from the DX's disk drive:







to remove the disk.






Basic Disk Drive Operations



Formatting a Disk















Saving Internal Memory
to Disk






















COMPARE
I"?- I('∞"	)[ Press and hold the Edit/Character button, and type in a name for the
.	. . file you wish to save to disk.
a-tARACTER

Press the +1/YES button again. The display will ask "" Are you sure?"

Press the +1/YES button once again.
'It is possible to store files on top of files already loaded (which will erase the original data). Make sure to select a blank file location before moving to the Save function.










Saving Cartridge Memory
to Disk
















lay




ove to a





d type in a name for the


will ask	Are you sure?"



Loading Internal Memory
from Disk






I
i
!
I'



Loading Cartridge Memory
from Disk









ï 


DiskMDR
The DX7 II FD's disk drive can also be used as a MIDI Data Recorder, to record MIDI information from external instruments via the DX's MIDI ports. The DX's disk can record external MIDI data into files of up to 20K bytes. To use this MIDI record function, make the proper MIDI connections and follow the prompts in the DX's LCD display.























ß Uil(IDIIll (ID
MIDI Functions


































- 75 -

Contents


77	MIDI Buttons
77	Button 31 LCD Displays
78	Button 32 LCD Displays

79	System Setup
79	Channel Messages
79	Note On/Off
79	Program Change Transmission
79	Local On/Off
80	Immediate MIDI Program Change Out
80	Control Number

81	Other System Setup Parameters	ï
81	MIDI Data Communications
81	MIDI Device Number
81	Receive Block
81	MIDI Out














f	4



MIDI Buttons


All of the MIDI functions and parameters are adjusted via the LCD displays called up using buttons 31 ~ 32. All of the these buttons call up multiple LCD displays. The charts below show all of the displays called up by each button, and provide a complete list of parameters and value ranges. In some cases, the first LCD display in a chart may not be the first one you see. You may need to cycle through the displays (by pressing the button repeatedly) until you reach the desired LCD display.


Button 31 LCD Displays




on/off >PC trns

>Note on/off
Note Selection (all, odd, avan)
>PC trns Mode
Program Change Transmit Mode
(off, normal, programmable)
>Local
Local Mode (off, on)

>[  1]  [  2]  [ 3]
Program Number to Sand (001 - 128)




>A
Receive Channel A (1 - 16, off)

,, "'''	>BReceive Channel B (1 - 16, off)
>OMni
Omni Mode (off, on)

>A
MIDI In Controller A (11-31)
>B
MIDI In Controller B (11-31)
>1
MIDI In Slider 1 (5 -31)
>2
MIDI In Slider 2 (5 ∑ 31)

Button 32 LCD Displays

>Device nuMber
Device Number (1 - 16, off)
>Receive block
Receive Block	(1 - 32, 33 - 64)

>Edit buf
Transmit Voice Edit Buffer
>1-32
Transmit Voice Data 1-32
>33-61
Transmit Voice Data 33-64

>Edit buf
Transmit Performance Edit Buffer
>INT
Transmit Internal Performance Memory

>Edit buf
Transmit Micro Tuning Edit Buffer
>INT
Transmit Internal Miao Tuning Memory
>CRT
Transmit Cartridge Micro Tuning Memory

>SYsteM setup
Transmit System Setup





f

System Setup


Since the use of many basic MIDI functions might depend on the contents of a specific set of Voice & Performance data, the new DX provides a special memory location, System Setup Memory, to store basic MIDI parameters and other data in conjunction with a Voice & Pe,formance Memory block. This System Setup Memory contains settings for the following parameters:

Channel Messages
This LCD display allows you to set the DX's MIDI transmission channel, MIDI receive channels (for Voice A and Voice Bin Performance Mode), and MIDI Omni Mode reception (on or off- if on, the receive channel settings are inactive).

Note On/Off
This parameter is usually set to off, meaning that all keys played produce a note. Other settings (Odd, Even) can be used in conjunction with other MIDI instruments to produce a variety of interesting effects.

Program Change Transmission
If the new DX is connected to another MIDI instrument, various levels of MIDI communication are possible. The MIDI Program Change Mode determines how the DX will relate to an external MIDI instrument: If Mode is set to Off, program changes on the DX will have no effect on the external unit; if Mode is set to Normal, a program change on the DX will send the same Program number to the external unit; if Mode is set to Programmable, the program changes sent will be be those programmed in the Program Change Trans LCD display.

Local On/Off
This parameter allows you to tum the DX's internal synthesizer on and off (as part of a MIDI system). If Local is set to Off, notes played on the DX keyboard will not engage the DX's internal sound mechanism.

Immediate MIDI Program Change Out
If you wish to send a quick MIDI Program Change Message to an external MIDI unit, use the following procedure:
0	ï	.

\OICl: MOOE-∑ SELECT
[ SINGLE	)I[,,_,._	)(sPuT


COMPAFE	EG COPY

In any of the Play Modes
(Single, Dual, Split, or Performance), press and hold the button of the
current Play Mode (the one with the lit LED). You will see this LCD display:

 
..



Now, while still holding the Play Mode button, type in the program change number you desire (1~128) using the 1~10 number buttons (1 through 0 character buttons). All three positions in the LCD must be filled:
for example, to send program #1, type in 001.

Once you have typed in the third number, the program change you have typed in will be sent over MIDI to the instrument connected to your DX? II.



Control Number
These parameters set the MIDI Controller numbers for external MIDI Controllers that may interact with the DX. The function of these Controllers is set via button 26 in Edit Mode.
In addition, these parameters set the MIDI function of CS I and CS 2 (as Controllers of external MIDI instruments), and also set the Controller number of an external MIDI Controller that can be used to control the Voice parameters connected to CS I and CS 2 in Performance Mode. If Controller values of 5 ~ 8 are selected, only MIDI transmission is possible.


Other System Setup Parameters
In addition to all of these MIDI settings, The System Setup Memory stores the Master Tune setting (button 14) and the Cartridge Bank setting (button 15). Whenever you load Voice & Performance data from Cartridge Memory or Disk Memory to Internal Memory, you have the option of loading with or without the System Setup stored with the Voice & Performance data.

System Setup Data
Button
Master Tuning
14
Cartridge Bank Number
15
MIDI Trns ch, Rev ch, Omni Mode
31
Local
31
Control Number
31
Note on/off
31
PC trans mode
31
Program change out
31



    MIDI Data Communications


If you use the new DX as part of a MIDI system, there are a number of advanced MIDI functions available for your use:

MIDI Device Number
If the DX is connected to another Yamaha product, this parameter must be used to set a Yamaha System Exclusive Device Number for MIDI System Exclusive data reception or transmission. This parameter is also used when the FD's disk drive is used as a MIDI data recorder.

Receive Block
This parameter allows you to set the Memory Reception block as either Internal Voices 1 ~ 32 or Internal Voices 33 ~ 64.

MIDI Out
These LCD displays allow you to transmit various kinds of MIDI System Exclusive data from the DX's Internal Memory to an external instrument. Obviously, these functions are useful only if you are transmitting data to another instrument (such as another DX7 II) that is capable of understanding and using it.

 Appendix 1: Supplemental Information


As mentioned at the outset, this manual has not attempted to cover all of the functions of the new DX in exhaustive detail. To do so would have required a manual of large scale and density, one in which it would have been very difficult to locate specific information needed to begin using the DX.

For continuing information concerning the DX7 II FD/D, consult AfterTouch, the official publication of the Yamaha Users Group. Many advanced functions will be discussed in its pages in the coming months. There will also be information concerning the availability of other material concerning more advanced applications. Some areas that will be covered in AfterTouch or in supplemental booklets include the following:


Quick Reference Guide Memory Management Fractional Scaling Micro Tuning (Basic)
Micro Tuning (Advanced)
FM Voice Programming (Basic)
FM Voice Programming (Advanced) Real-Time Parameter Changes Advanced Controller Usage Advanced MIDI Applications
MIDI Technical Data & Charts

To receive a free copy of AfterTouch every month, send your request to Aftertouch, P.O. Box 2338, Northiridge, CA 91323-2338. On your letter or postcard, be sure to indicate that you are the owner of a DX7 II FD/D.

 Appendix 2: Bibliography


Many of the basic functions of the DX7 II FD/D are the same as those of the original DX7. Since there is a wealth of material available on the operation of the original DX7, this manual has focused on the new functions and features. For more information on the parameters and features that the new DX shares with the original DX7, consult the following:

DX7 Owner's Manual. (Available through your local authorized Yamaha dealer). The Complete DX7, by Howard Massey; published by Amsco Publications; 1986.
FM Theory and Application, by Dr. John Chowning and David Bristow; published by Yamaha Music Foundation; 1986.

How to Understand and Program the Yamaha DX7, by Lorenz M. Rychner; published by Alexander Publishing; 1985.

The Secrets of Analog and Digital Synthesis, by Steve de Furia; published by Hal Leonard Publishing; 1985.

Yamaha Easy DX7; published by Yamaha Music Foundation and Hal Leonard Publishing; 1986.

Appendix 3: MIDI Implementation Chart
[ Digititl P1--ogr-Mllll!li"ible Algor-1thm Synthesizer- l	Date : 11/21, 1986 Kadel DX7-2	XIDI Implementation Chart Version : 1.0
+	+
Transmitted	Recognized	Remarks
Function ... :
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:

:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
Default	3	: 1, 2, 3, 4	memorized
:Mode	Messages : x	: POLY, MONO<M=l): Altered	: 11111111111111 : x	12:
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:Note	: 36 - 96	11 : 0 - 127	12 :
:Number : True voice: 11111111111111 : 1 - 127
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:Velocity Note ON	: o 9nH,v=l-127 : o v=l-127 Note OFF : x 9nH,v=0	: x
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+	--.
:After	Key's	: x	: x
:Touch	Ch's	: o	11 : o	12 :
.-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:Pitch Bender	: o	11 : o 0-12 semi 12 :7 bit resolution:
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:


:Control
:Change



9
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:Prog	: o 0 - 127 11 : o 0 - 127 12 :
:Change : True#	: 11111111111111 :	0 - 127	:64-127:Cartridge:
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:System Exclusive	: o	13 : o	13 :Voice parameters:
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:System: Song Pos : x	x
: Song Sel : x	: x
:Common: Tune	: x	:	x
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+	--.
:System	:Clock	: x	:	x
:Real Time :Commands: x	:	x
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:Aux	:Local ON/OFF: x	x
:All Notes OFF: x	o (126,127)
:Mes- :Active Sense : o	o
:sages:Reset	: x	x
:-------------------+----------------+----------------+----------------:
:Notes: 11 = transmit if transmit channel is not off.
12 = receive if receive channel is not off.
13  = transmit/receive if device number is not off.

+	+
Xode 1	OMNI ON,	POLY	Mode 2	OMNI ON,	MONO	o:	 Yes Mode 3: OMNI OFF, POLY	Mode 4 : OMNI OFF, MONO	 x:	No



II	) /2-FO/D
ï 
-..,
Voice name
Date	I	I
-=
t-

r':>
(D
t:::,
......
(1
:r
......
0u0,





Blank Performance Data Chart




Performance name :


A
B
Voice mode


Voice No(name)


Total volume

Balance


Dual detune


Split point


Sustain foot switch


Foot switch
(	)RNG


Continuous  slider	I
(	)


Continuous slider	2
(	)


Micro tuning table select
(	)
Key=


EG forced damping

Note shift


PAN mode

PAN range

PAN select


PAN  EG
RI
R2
R3
R4

LI
L2
L3
L4













- 86 -




MIDI DATA FORMAT




1. Transmission Requirements


ACTIVE SENSING




$FE

NOTE ON/OFF

$9n

MODULATION WHEEL
BREATH CONTROL

$Bn,
$Bn,

FOOT CONTROL

$Bn,
---	EDIT MODE
VOLUME

$Bn,

CONTINUOUS SLIDER 1
*l
$Bn,

CONTINUOUS SLIDER 2
*2
$Bn,

SUSTAIN SWITCH

$Bn,

PORTAMENTO SWITCH

$Bn,

SOSTENUTO

$Bn,

SOFT

$Bn,

DATA ENTRY +1

$Bn,

DATA ENTRY -1

$Bn,

PROGRAM CHANGE

$Cn

AFTER TOUCH

$Dn


PITCH BENDER	$En

VOICE EDIT BUFFER	$F0, $43, $OS,
SUPPLEMENT  EDIT BUFFER	$F0, $43, $OS,
PACKED 32 SUPPLEMENT	$F0, $43, $OS,
PACKED 32 VOICE	$F0, $43, $OS,
PACKED 32 PERFORMANCE	$F0, $43, $OS,
PERFORMANCE EDIT BUFFER	$F0, $43, $OS,
SYSTEM SETUP	$F0, $43, $OS,
MICRO TUNING EDIT BUFFER	$F0, $43, $OS,
MICRO TUNING IN MEMORY	$F0, $43, $OS,
MICRO TUNING IN CARTRIDGE	 $F0, $43, $OS, FRACTIONAL SCALING EDIT BUFFER	$F0, $43, $OS, FRACTIONAL SCALING IN CARTRIDGE	 $F0, $43, $OS,


MIDI OUT











VOICE PARAMETER CHANGE	$F0, $43, $1S,
SUPPLEMENT PARAMETER CHANGE	 $F0, $43, $1S, PERFORMANCE PARAMETER CHANGE	 $F0, $43, $1S, MICRO TUNING PARAMETER CHANGE	$F0, $43, $1S,

FRACTIONAL SCALING PARAMETER CHANGE	$F0, $43. ,

$1S,


*1 BALANCE $Bn, $08 in EDIT MODE

Add-I





2. Transmission Data


2-1.  Channel Information
Transmission Is possible only when 1~ 16 Is specified as the transmission channel.
1) Channel voice message

1  Key ON/OFF

2-2.  System Information

1) System real time message
Active sensing
Status	1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0  (FE)

2) System exclualve meHage

Status Note No. Velocity

1 0 0 1 n n n n 0 k k k k k k k 0vvvvvvv 00000000

(9n)	n = channel No.
k=36(Ct)~96(C6)
{v=O) Key ON (v = 0) Key OFF


Transmission is possible only when the device No. is set to 1~16.
1 Parameter change

2 Control change
Status	 1 0 1 1 n n n n (Bn) n = channel No. Control No.	0 c c c c c c c
Control Value  0 v v v v v v v
Control No.
c=1	Modulation wheel	v=0~127
c=2	Breath control	v=0~127
c=4	Foot control	v=0~127
c=5	Portamento time	v=0~127

Status ID No.
Substatus/ device No. Parameter group No. Parameter No. Data

EOX

1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0	(FO)
0 100	0 0 1 1	(43)

0 0 0 1 n n n n	(1n)
0ggggghh 0ppppppp
0ddddddd} Single or multiple 0ddddddd bytes
1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1  (F7)

c=7	Volume	v=0~127
c=5~ c=31
c=64
Continuous slider

Sustain SW
v=0~127

v=0: OFF, 127: ON
c=65
Portamento SW
v=0: OFF, 127: ON
c=66
Sostenuto
v=O: OFF, 127: ON
c=67
Soft
v=0: OFF, 127: ON

3 Program change
Status	1100nnnn (Cn) n = channel No. Program No.	0ppppppp	p=0~63:
 INTERNAL p=64~127:
CARTRIDGE


There are seven parameter group Nos. and parameter Nos.


4 After touch
Status	 1101nnnn (Dn) n = channel No. Value	0vvvvvvv	v=0~127
5 Pitch bender
Status	 1 1 1 O n n n n	(En) n = channel No. Value (LSB)	0uuuuuuu
Value (MSB)	0vvvvvvv Resolution 7bit
The transmission data are as follows:





NOTE1 	-,


MSB


LSB


0O000ppp
00kkkkkk
operator number
key group number	total of
00000000
(00)
00000000
(00)
Min.
0hhhhhhh
data (high)	0-1	binary  4 byte
01000000
(40)
00000000
(00)
Mid.
01111111
data (low)	0-127 binary
01111111
(7F)
01111110
(7E)
Max.



NOTE 3-----------------
Under the Supplement parameter change, DX? function parameter change will be transmitted along with the above.

Add-2




.	l,_ _ -



ï Fractional Scaling Parameter Change	2 Bulk data


Operator number


For


Voice edit buffer Supplement edit buffer Packed 32 supplement
Packed 32 voice


Status
11110000
(F0)
ID No.
01000011
(43)








Key group number

K
Key
Data
0
offset
-127 ~ 127
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
C -2- C-1
C#-1-D#-1
E-1 -F#-1
 G-1 - A-1 A#-1- co
C#O - D#O
EO - F#O GO - AO
A#O- Cl C#l-D#l
El - F#l Gl -  Al
A#l- C2
C:112 - D:112 E2 -F:112
G2 - A2
A:112- C3 C:113 - D:113
E3 - F:113 G3 - A3
A:113- C4 C:114 - D:114
 E4 - F:114 G4 - A4 A:114- cs
C:115 - D:115
ES - F:115 GS - AS
A#S- C6 C:116 - D:116
E6 - F:116 G6 - A6
A:116- C7 C:117 - D:117
 E7 - F 7 G7 - A7 A:117 - cs
C:118 - D:118
ES - F:118 GS
0 -255





Substatus/	0000nnnn (On) device No.
Format No.	 0fffffff Byte count (MSB) 0 b b b b b b b Byte count (LSB) 0bbbbbbb Data	0ddddddd
!
                       0ddddddd
(Complement of 2) Checksum	0eeeeeee (Binary)	EOX	1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 (F7)

Format No.

Data
 Byte count
0
Voice edit buffer
155
5
Supplement edit buffer
49
6
Packed 32 supplement
1120
9
Packed 32 voice
4096

ï When using universal Bulk Damp
Status	11110000  (F0)
ID No.	01000011   (43)
Substatus/	0000nnnn (On) device No.
Format No.	0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0  (7E)

Byte count (MSB) 0 b b b b b b b Byte count (LSB) 0bbbbbbb
Classification	0aaaaaaa   ASCll'L
name	0aaaaaaa	'M
(4 bytes)
0aaaaaaa
0aaaaaaa

Repeat group
Data format
0mmmmmmm
ASCII
name (6 bytes)
!


0mmmmmmm

Data
0ddddddd


!


0ddddddd

Checksum
0eeeeeee

EOX
11110111
(F7)










Add-3















Data
 Byte count
Classification name
Data format name
 No. of repeats
DX7 II Performance Edit Buffer
61
LM--
8973P E
1
DX7 II Packed 32 Performance
1642
LM--
8973P M
1
DX7 II System Set-up
112
LM--
8973 S-
1
Micro Tuning Edit Buffer
266
LM--
MCRYE
1
Micro Tuning with Memory #x
266
LM--
MCRYMx
1
Micro Tuning Cartridge
266
LM--
MCRYC-
64
Fractional Scaling Edit Buffer
502
LM--
FKSYE -
1
Fractional Scaling in Cartridge with Memory#
502
LM--
FKSYC-
32

Note 1) The x of MCRYMx is a memory No. expressed in binary form, 0 or 1.
Note 2) When the number of repeats is 64, the data group from byte count to checksum will be transmitted 64 times.













































Add-4





3. Reception Requirements










OMNI


OFF ON



MIDI
IN















$43, $OS, $09	PACKED 32 VOICE
MPREOMTEOCTR $F$FO0  $43,  $OS,  $06	PACKED 32 SUPPLEMENT
ON	'
$F0, $43, $OS, $7E	PACKED 32 PERFORMANCE
OFF	$F0, $43, $OS, $7E	SYSTEM SETUP
$F0, $43, $OS, $7E	MICRO TUNING IN MEMORY
ON.	$F0, $43, $OS, $7E	MICRO TUNING IN CARTRIDGE
   o!-C$FO, $43, $OS, $7E	FRACTIONAL SCALING IN CARTRIDGE CARTRIDGE
PROTECT
$F0,
$43,
$OS,
$00
VOICE EDIT BUFFER
$F0,
$43,
$OS,
$05
SUPPLEMENT EDIT BUFFER
$F0,
$43,
$OS,
$7E
PERFORMANCE EDIT BUFFER
$F0,
$43,
$OS,
$7E
MICRO TUNING EDIT BUFFER
$F0,
$43,
$OS,
$7E
FRACTIONAL SCALING EDIT BUFFER
$F0,
$43,
$IS,
$00-$01
VOICE PARAMETER CHANGE
$F0,
$43,
$1S,
$18
SUPPLEMENT PARAMETER CHANGE
$F0,
$43,
$1S,
$19
PERFORMANCE PARAMETER CHANGE
$F0,
$43,
$IS,
$18
REMOTE SWITCH
$F0, $43, $1S, $18, $7E	MICRO TUNING PARAMETER CHANGE
$F0, $43, $IS, $18, $7F	FRACTIONAL SCALING PARAMETER CHANGE

	F0,  $43, $2S	DUMP REQUEST



Add-5

4. Reception Data

4-1. Channel Information	4  Program change

There are two types of MIDI reception channels for channel messages: A and 8.


Status Program No.

1100nnnn 0ppppppp

(Cn) n = channel No. p=0~127

Single mode Dual mode Split mode

: Only A is effective
: Only A is effective
: A, 8 independent
The split point function is effective when A= 8, assigning A to the lower half and 8 to the upper half.

0~31 select internal PERFORMANCE combinations in PERFORMANCE mode.
32~63 select cartridge PERFORMANCE combinations. Values over 63 repeat this order of selection (INT 1 ~32 ... CRT 1 ~32).
In Single, Dual or Split mode, 0~63 select INT voices,

1) Channel voice me11age

1  Key OFF

64~127 CRT voices.

5  After touch


Status Note No. Velocity


100 0 n n n n (8n) 0 k k k k k k k 0vvvvvvv


n = channel No.
k = 0(C.2) ~ 127(Gs)
Ignore vs


Status Value
6 Pitch bender
1 
0 1 1 n n n n  (Dn)  n=channel No. 0 V V V V V V V	V = 0 ~ 127

2 Key ON/OFF
Status	 1 0 0 1 n n n n (9n)	 n = channel No. Note No.	 0 k k k k k k k	 k = 0(C.2) ~ 127(Gs) Velocity	0vvvvvvv	v=1~127 Key ON
00000000	Key OFF
3 Control change


Status		1 1 0 n n n n (En) n = channel No. Value (LSB)	0 u u u u u u u
Value (MSB)	0 v v v v v v v Operates with only the MSB data.

00000000	Min.


Status
1 0 1 1 n n n n
(Bn)
01000000
Mid.
Control No.
0ccccccc

0 1111111
Max.

Control Value	0 v v v v v v v
c=1	Modulation wheel	v=0~127
c=2	Breath control	v=0~127
c=4	Foot control	v=0~127
c=5	Portamento time	v=0~127
c=B Balance	v=0~127 C = 9-31	Continuous slider	v=0~127 C = 9-31	 MIDI control	v=0~127


2) Channel mode me11age
1  MONO/All note off

1 0 1 1 n n n n	(Bn)
0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0	(7E) Mono/All note off
0 mmmmmmm  Set to the Mono mode with only m=1
recognized.
Ignore when m ;,i 1.

c=64
Sustain SW
v=0~63: OFF,
64~127: ON
2 POLY/ All note off
c=65
Portamento SW
v=0~63: OFF,
1 0 1 1 n n n n	(Bn)


64~127: ON
0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1	(7F)
c=66
Sosutenuto
v=0~63: OFF,
64~127: ON
00000000
Poly/Ali note off
c=67
Soft
v=0~63: OFF,
64~127: ON

4-2.  System Information


The continuous sliders can be assigned to certain internal effects.
MIDI control can be assigned in the same way as foot control.
1) 
System real time me11ages

Active sensing
Status	1 1 1 1 1 1 1 o  (FE)
Upon reception of the code, sensing will start. When there is no status byte or data for 300 msec, the MIDI reception buffer is cleared and the on-going sound turned OFF.







Add-6





2) System exclualve meaugea

1 Parameter change (Switch remote)

Status
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
(F0)
ID No.
01000011
(43)
Substatus/	0001nnnn (1n) device No.

Parameter group No.
Switch No.
00011011

0mmmmmmm
(18)
Data
0ddddddd
d=0:OFF d=127:ON
EOX
1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1
(F7)

All the panel switches are controlled. The switch numbers are follows:
2 Parameter change
Same as for transmission

3 Bulk data
Same as for transmission

4 Dump request

For

Voice edit buffer	(f = 0) Supplement edit buffer (f= 5) Packed 32 supplement   (f = 6)
Packed 32 voice	(f = 9)


Status
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
(F0)
ID No.
0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1
(43)

Substatus/ device No. Format No. EOX

0 0 1 0 n n n n	(2n)

0 f f f f f f f	f = 0, 5, 6, 9
1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1  (F7)

ï Unlversal bulk dump

Status
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
(F0)
ID No.
0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1
(43)
Substatus/	0010nnnn (2n) device No.
Format No.	0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0  (7E)
Classification	0aaaaaaa name		!
(ASCII 4 letters)
0aaaaaaa
Data format	0mmmmmmm name		!
(ASCII 6 letters)
0mmmmmmm
EOX	1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1
Classification name and data format name are same as for transmission.
Add-7





5-1. Voice Parameter (VCED format)


g
h
P.NO
PARAMETER
DATA

NOTES

INIT
0
0
0
Rl
0
-
99
EG RATE!	21 42 63 84  105
99


1
R2
0
-
99
EG RATE2	22 43 64 85 106
99


2
R3
0
-
99
EG RATE3	23 44 65 86 107
99


3
R4
0
-
99
EG RATE4	24 45 66 87 108
99


4
L1
0
-
99
EG LEVEL!	25 46 67 88  109
99


5
L2
0
-
99
EG LEVEL2	26 47 68 89  110
99


6
L3
0
-
99
EG LEVEL3	27 48 69 90  111
99


7
L4
0
-
99
EG LEVEL4	28 49 70 91  112
00


8
BP
0
-
99
BREAK POINT	29 50 71 92  113
39


9
LD
0
-
99
LEFT DEPTH	30 51 72 93  114
0


10
RD
0
-
99
RIGHT DEPTH	31 52 73 94  115
0


11
LC
0
-
3
LEFT CURVE	32 53 74 95 116
0


12
RC
0
-
3
RIGHT CURVE	33 54 75 96  117
0


13
RS
0
-
7
RATE SCALING	34 55 76 97 118
0


14
AMS
0
-
3
MODULATION SENSITIVITY	35 56 77 98 119
0


15
TS
0
-
7
TOUCH SENSITIVITY	36 57 78 99  120
0


16
TL
0
-
99
TOTAL LEVEL	37 58 79 100 121
(OPl:99)0


17
PM
0
-
1
FREQUENCY MODE	38 59 80 101 122
0


18
PC
0
-
31
FREQUENCY COURSE	39 60 81102123
1


19
PF
0
-
99
FREQUENCY FINE	40 6182103 124
0



PD
0
-
14
DETUNE	41 62 83 104 125
7

. ------- ---
-	------∑-----
- -ïï  --------
------------	∑-------------------- ------- ------------ ---------------∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑---------
∑∑∑∑∑---------------


126
PR!
0
-
99
PEG RATE!
99


127
PR2
0
-
99
PEG RATE2
99
0
1
128
PR3
0
-
99
PEG RATE3
99


129
PR4
0
-
99
PEG RATE4
99


130
PLl
0
-
99
PEG LEVEL!
50


131
PL2
0
-
99
PEG LEVEL2
50


132
PL3
0
-
99
PEG LEVEL3
50


133
PL4
0
-
99
PEG LEVEL4
50


134
ALS
0
-
31
ALGORITHM SELECTOR
0


135
FBL
0
-
7
FEED BACK LEVEL
0


136
OP!
0
-
1
OSC.PHASE !NIT
1


137
LFS
0
-
99
LFO SPEED
35


138
LFD
0
-
99
LFO DELAY TIME
0


139
LPMD
0
-
99
PITCH MODULATION DEPTH
0


140
LAMD
0
-
99
AMPLITUDE MODULATION DEPTH
0


141
LFKS
0
-
1
LFO KEY SYNC
1


142
LFW
0
-
5
LFO WAVE
0


143
LPMS
0
-
7
LFO PITCH MODULATION SENSITIVITY
3


144
TRNP
0
-
48
TRANSPOSE
24


145
VNAMI
ASC
VOICE NAME
I


146
VNAM2
ASC
VOICE NAME
N


147
VNAM3
ASC
VOICE NAME
I


148
149
VNAM4
VNAM5
ASC
ASC
VOICE NAME
VOICE NAME
T


150
VNAM6
ASC
VOICE NAME
V


151
VNAM7
ASC
VOICE NAME
0


152
VNAM8
ASC
VOICE NAME
I


153
VNAM9
ASC
VOICE NAME
C


154
VNAMlO
ASC
VOICE NAME
E


-  ∑∑∑∑∑∑-∑∑
∑∑-ï∑- ..... -------


∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑-∑∑-----




--∑ ∑ï------------ ----------	------------ ∑∑∑∑∑--------∑∑-∑∑∑∑∑	∑-



155
OPE
0
-
63
OPERATOR ENABLE B5:0Pl.∑∑,BO:OP6



156
OPSEL
0
-
5
OPERATOR SELECT O:OPI,--,5:0P6


5-2. Additional Parameters (ACED format)

g
h	P.NO	PARAMETER	DATA	INIT	NOTES
6
0	0	SCM	0 -	1	0	OP6 scaling mode normal/fraction


1 SCM	0 -	1	0	OP5 scaling mode normal/fraction
2 SCM	0 -	1	0	OP4 scaling mode normal/fraction
3 SCM	0 -	1	0	OP3 scaling mode normal/fraction
4 SCM	0 -	1	0	OP2 scaling mode normal/fraction
5 SCM	0 -	1	0	OPl  scaling mode normal/fraction
6 AMS	0 -	7	0	OP6 amplitude modulation sensitivity
7 AMS	0 -	7	0	OP5 amplitude modulation sensitivity
8 AMS	0 -	7	0	OP4 amplitude modulation sensitivity
9 AMS	0 -	7	0	OP3 amplitude modulation sensitivity
10 AMS	0 -	7	0	OP2 amplitude modulation sensitivity
11 AMS	0 -	7	0	OPl amplitude modulation sensitivity
---∑-∑∑∑∑∑∑ ∑---∑∑∑--------- ------ ∑∑∑∑∑∑-------- ...  ...  ------- --------- ------------------ -------------∑	------- ∑∑-∑∑∑∑
12 PEGR	0 -	3	0	pitch EG range 8va/4va/lva/l/2va
13 LTRG	0 -	1	0	LFO key trigger (delay) single/multi
14 VPSW	0 -	1	0	pitch EG by velocity switch off/on:0/1
15 PMOD	0 -	3	0	bit0;poly/mono , bitl;unison off/on
---∑∑∑----- ∑∑∑-∑∑∑∑∑∑------∑∑ ---- ---- ∑∑∑∑-	∑∑-----∑∑  -------- -------
16 PBR	0 -  12	2	pitch bend range
17 PBS	0 -  12	0	step
18 PBM	0 -	2	0	mode low/high/k.on
19 RNDP	0 -	7	0	ramdom pitch fluctuation off/5c-4lc
∑---------- ----------------∑∑ ---- ---- ...  ----- - ...  ..  ------
20 PORM	0 -	1	0	portamento mode rtn/fllw fngrd/flltm
21 PQNT	0 -  12	0	step
22 POS	0 -  99	0	time
---∑∑∑----- ∑∑--------------∑∑ .. - ---- ------	---------
23 MWPM	0 -  99	0	modulation wheel pitch mod range
24 MWAM	0 -  99	0	amplitude mod range
25 MWEB	0 -  99	0	EG bias range
26 FClPM	0 -  99	0	foot controler 1 pitch mod range
27 FClAM	0 -  99	0	amplitude mod range
28 FClEB	0 -  99	0	EG bias range
29 FClVL	0 -  99	0	volume range
----------- -----------------∑∑∑ -- ∑∑∑-∑ -----
30 BCPM	0 -  99	0	breath controler pitch mod range
31 BCAM	0 -  99	0	amplitude mod range
32 BCEB	0 -  99	0	EG bias range
33 BCPB	0 - 100	50	pitch bias range
∑∑∑∑∑--∑∑∑∑ ----∑∑-∑∑∑∑∑∑∑ ---- ...  -----------	-------
34 ATPM	0 -  99	0	after touch	pitch mod range
35 ATPM	0 -  99	0	amplitude mod range
36 ATEB	0 -  99	0	EG bias range
37 ATPB	0 - 100	50	pitch bias range
38 PGRS	0 -	7	0	pitch EG rate scaling depth
39-63	reserved
64 FC2PM	0 -  99	0	pitch mod. range
65 FC2AM	0 -  99	0	amp  mod. range
66 FC2EB	0 -  99	0	EG	bias range
67 FC2VL	0 -  99	0	volume	range
∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑-- ∑∑∑∑∑∑∑--∑∑∑----∑∑-∑--- --------------
68 MCPM	0 -	99	0	pitch mod. range
69 MCAM	0 -	99	0	amp  mod. range
70 MCEB	0 -	99	0	EG	bias range
71 MCVL	0 -  99	0	volume	range
----------- ----------------∑------ ∑∑---- ---∑---
72 UDTN	0 -	7	0	unison detune depth
73 FCCSl	0 - 1 0	foot cntl.l use as CS! switch off/on:0/1





--∑∑∑





∑∑---



---∑-


-----




---∑∑


-----


---∑∑

-----





.....




---∑-


-----



∑∑∑∑∑





-----






-----


-----

-----





5-3. PERFORMANCE Parameters (PCED, PMEM format)


g

h

P.NO

PARAMETER

DATA

NOTES

INIT
6
1
0
PLMD
0 -	2
0/1/2 : SINGLE/DUAL/SPLIT

1


1
2
VNMA VNMB
0 - 127
0 - 127
A-CH VOICE NUMBER B-CH VOICE NUMBER
0
0


3
MCTB
0 -  74
MICRO TUNING TABLE SELECT
0


4
MCKY
0 -  11
MICRO TUNING KEY
0


5
MCSW
0 -	3
MICRO TUNING SWITCH BIT0:A,BITl:B 0/1:OFF/Ofll
0


6
DDTN
0 -	7
DUAL DETUNE
0


7
SPPT
0 - 127
SPLIT POINT
60


8
FDMP
0 -	1
EG FORCED DAMPING SWITCH 0/1:OFF/ON
0


9
SFSW
0 -	3
SUSTAIN FOOT SWITCH BIT0:A,BITl:B 0/1:OFF/ON
3


10
FSAS
0 -	3
FOOT SWITCH ASSIGN 0:SUS,l:POR,2:KHLD,3:SFT
1


11
FSW
0 -	3
FOOT SWITCH BIT0:A,BITl:B 0/1:OFF/ON
3


12
SPRNG
0 -	7
SOFT PEDAL RANGE
0


13
NSFTA
0 -	48
NOTE SHIFT RANGE FOR SINGLE,DUAL,SPLIT(A)
24


14
NSFTB
0 -	48
NOTE SHIFT RANGE FOR SPLIT(B)
24


15
BLNC
0 - 100
VOLUME BALANCE	(-50 -+50)
0


16
TVLM
0 -  99
TOT AL VOLUME
99


17
CSLDl
0 - 105
CONTINUOUS SLIDER 1
0


18
CSLD2
0 - 109
CONTINUOUS SLIDER 2
0


19
CSSW
0 -	3
CONTINUOUS SLIDER ASSIGN SWITCH bl,3:B,b0,2:A
0


20
PNMD
0 -	3
PAN MODE 0:MIX,1:ON-ON,2:ON-OFF,3:OFF-ON
1


21
PANRNG
0 -  99
PAN CONTROLL RANGE
0


22
PANASN
0 -	2
PAN CON TROLL ASSIGN 0/1/2:LFO/VELOCITY/KEY#
0


23
PNEGRl
0 -  99
PAN EG RATE 1
99


24
PNEGR2
0 -  99
PAN EG RATE 2
99


25
PNEGR3
0 -  99
PAN EG RATE 3
99


26
PNEGR4
0 -  99
PAN EG RATE 4
99


27
PNEGLl
0 -  99
PAN EG LEVEL 1
50


28
PNEGL2
0 -  99
PAN EG LEVEL 2
50


29
PNEGL3
0 -  99
PAN EG LEVEL 3
50


30
PNEGL4
0 -  99
PAN EG LEVEL 4
50


31
PNAM
ASCII
PERFORMANCE NAME
I


32
II
II
fl
N


33
II
fl
fl
I


34
II
fl
fl
T


35
II
II
fl



36
II
II

fl
p


37
II
II
fl
E


38
II
fl
II
R


39
II
fl
fl
F


40
II
II
II



I
II
II
II



50
II
fl
II







Add-IO

5-4. Voice Data (VMEM format)

NO

BIT&	BITS	BIT4	BIT3	BIT2

BITI

BITO

0
Rl









- I	-	I
PD
- I	-	I
- I
- .......... --------∑∑-------










- I	-	I
- I	-	I



LPMS
Rl R2 R3 R4 L1 L2 L3 L4
BP LD RD
- I	RC
I
TS TL PC PF
-------- ∑∑------- ∑∑------ ------
PRl PR2 PR3 PR4
PLl PL2 PL3 PL4 ALS
- I OPl	I
LFS LFD LPMD LAMD
I	LFW
TRNP VNAMl VNAM2 VNAM3 VNAM4 VNAM5 VNAM6 VNAM7 VNAM8 VNAM9 VNAMl0










I RS I











FBL










LC AMS I PM












I LFKS
17 34 51 68 85
1
R2




18 35 52 69 86
2
R3




19 36 53 70 87
3
R4




20 37 54 71 88
4
L1




21 38 55 72 89
5
L2




22 39 56 73 90
6
L3




23 40 57 74 91
7
L4




24 41 58 75 92
8
BP




25 42 59 76 93
9
LO




26 43 60 77 94
10
RD




27 44 61 78 95
11
RC




28 45 62 79 96
12
PD




29 46 63 80 97
13
TS




30 47 64 81 98
14
TL




31 48 65 82 99
15
PC




32 49 66 83 100
16
PF




33 50 67 84 101
--∑∑∑∑- --- ∑---∑∑∑∑∑------------










... --- ........
102
PRl





103
PR2





104
PR3





105
PR4





106
PLl





107
PL2





108
PL3





109
PL4





110
ALS





111
OPI





112
LFS





113
LFD





114
LPMD





115
LAMD





116
LPMS





117
TRNP





118
VNAMl





119
VNAM2





120
VNAM3





121
VNAM4





122
VNAM5





123
VNAM6





124
VNAM7





125
VNAM8





126
VNAM9





127
VNAMl0











Add-11





-  - 	



5-5. Additional Data (AMEM format)

NO


BIT6

BITS


BIT4

BIT3	BIT2	BITI	BITO

(I
SCM
-	I
OPl
I
OP2
I
OP3	I	OP4	I	OP5	I	OP6
I
AMS
-	I


OP5

I	OP6
2
AMS
-	I


OP3

I	OP4
3
AMS
-	I


OPl

I	OP2
4
s
PEGR
PMOD

-	I
RNDP


PBR

I
VPSWI	LTRG I	PEGR
I	PMOD
6
PBS
-	I


PBM
I
PBS
7
RNDP
-	I
-
I


PQNT	I	PORM
!l
POS





POS
9
MWPM





MWPM
JO
MWAM





MWAM
II
MWEB





MWEB
12
FC!PM





FClPM
13
FC!AM





FClAM
14
FCIEB





FCIEB
l:i
FC!VL





FClVL
Hi
BCPM





BCPM
17
BCAM





BCAM
JR
BCEB





BCEB
19
BCPB





BCPB
20
ATPM





ATPM
21
ATAM





ATAM
22
ATEB





ATEB
23
ATPB





ATPB
24
2S
PGRS
----





I	PGRS
RESERVED







-------- ------- --------∑∑∑∑ ---- ----∑-∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑∑------------
26
FC2PM





FCZPM
27
FC2AM





FCZAM
28
FC2EB





FCZEB
29
FC2VL





FCZVL
30
MCPM





MCPM
31
MCAM





MCAM
32
MCEB





MCEB
33
MCVL





MCVL
34
lJDTN




I
FCCSl I	UDTN















Add-12

5-6. System Set-up Parameters
* ...... SYSTEM memory 102 bytes g=6.h= I
pl
name
data
lnlt
notes
64  0
TXCH
0-15
0
* MIDI TX channel
* MIDI channel voice message TRANS switch
* MIDI RX channel 16:off
* MIDI RX channel 16:off
* MIDI OMNI MODE SWITCH 0/1:OFF/ON
* MIDI CONTROLER NUMBER
* MIDI CONTROLER NUMBER
* CONTINUOUS SLIDER 1 CONTROLL MUMBER
* CONTINUOUS SLIDER 2 CONTROLL NUMBER
* MIDI key on/off normal/odd/even:0/1/2 flag
* PROGRAM CHANGE TRANS MODE FLAG 0/1/2:of/nor/prg
* LOCAL SWITCH 0/1:OFF/ON
* MIDI transmit block flag
* MIDI recieve block flag
* MIDI system common message RX channel (device No.)
* MIDI system common message switch
* cartridge appoint bank number
* cartridge appoint bank number
* cartridge appoint bank number
* memory protect --- bitOaINT. bitlaCRT.
* master tune
* PROGRAMMABLE PROGRAM CHANGE TRANS SET BUFFER
65 1
CVMSW
0-1
1

66 2
RXCHA
0-16
0

67 3
RXCHB
0-16
0

68 4
OMNI
0-1
1

69 5
MCONTA
11-31
12

70 6
MCONTB
11-31
13

71  7
MCSNUMl
11-31
14

72 8
MCSNUM2
11-31
15

73 9
MKOEFG
0-2
0

74 10
PPCMOD
0-2
1

75 11
LOCAL
0-1
0

76 12
MTBFLG
0-1
0

77 13
MRBFLG
0-1
0

78 14
SCMCH
0-15
0

79 15
SCMSW
0-1
1

80 16
APTBNKl
0-15
0

81 17
APTBNK2
0-15
2

82 18
APTBNK3
0-15
3

83 19
PROTECT
0-3
3

gal,haO




64 37
MSTUNE
0-127
64

-38-101
PPCBUF
0-127
sw#







5-7. Micro Tuning Parameters


BYTE

KEY NAME

DATA

NOTES
0
C-2
0 - 84
MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB MSB LSB
48 co
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72 Cl
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96 C2
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120 C3
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144 C4
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168 cs
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192 C6
193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216 C7
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
239
240 C8
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255
l
C-2
0 -127 0-10794






2
C#-2
0 - 84






3
C#-2
0 -127 0-10794






4
D-2
0 - 84






5
D-2
0 -127 0-10794






6
D#-2
0 - 84






7
D#-2
0 -127 0-10794






8
E-2
0 - 84






9
E-2
0 -127 0-10794






10
F-2
0 - 84






11
F-2
0 -127 0-10794






12
F#-2
0 - 84






13
F#-2
0 -127 0-10794






14
G-2
0 - 84






15
G-2
0 -127 0-10794






16
G#-2
0 - 84






17
G#-2
0 -127 0-10794






18
A-2
0 - 84






19
A-2
0 -127 0-10794






20
A#-2
0 - 84






21
A#-2
0 -127 0-10794






22
B-2
0 - 84






23
B-2
0 -127 0-10794






24
C-1







25








26








27








28








29








30








31








32








33








34








35








36








37








38








39








40








41








42








43








44








45








46








47









5-8. Fractional Key Scaling Parameters


OPG


OPS

OP4

OP3

OP2

OPI

DATA
0
OFS
C-2	-	C-1
C#-1	-	D#-1
E-1	-	F#-1∑
G-1	-	A-1
A#l	-	co
C#O	-	D#O
EO	-	F#O
GO	-	AO
A#O	-	Cl
C#l	-	D#l
El	-	F#l
Gl	-	Al
A#l	-	C2
C#2	-	D#2
E2	-	F#2
G2	-	A2
A#2	-	C3
C#3	-	D#3
E3	-	F#3
G3	-	A3
A#3	-	C4
C#4	-	D#4
E4	-	F#4
G4	-	A4
A#4	-	C4
C#5	-	D#5
E5	-	F#5
G5	-	A5
A#5	-	C6
C#6	-	D#6
E6	-	F#6
G6	-	A6
A#6	-	C7
C#7	-	D#7
E7	-	F#7
G7	-	A7
A#7	-	CB
C#8	-	D#8
E8	-	F#8
GB	-
41
82
123
164
205
-128
-127
1

42
83
124
165
206
0
-255
2

43
84
125
166
207
0
-255
3

44
85
126
167
208
0
-255
4

45
86
127
168
209
0
-255
5

46
87
128
169
210
0
-255
6

47
88
129
170
211
0
-255
7

48
89
130
171
212
0
-255
8

49
90
131
172
213
0
-255
9

50
91
132
173
214
0
-255
10

51
92
133
174
215
0
-255
11

52
93
134
175
216
0
-255
12

53
94
135
176
217
0
-255
13

54
95
136
177
218
0
-255
14

55
96
137
178
219
0
-255
15

56
97
138
179
220
0
-255
16

57
98
139
180
221
0
-265
17

58
99
140
181
222
0
-255
18

59
100
141
182
223
0
-255
19

60
101
142
183
224
0
-255
20

61
102
143
184
225
0
-255
21
22

62
63
103
104
144
145
185
186
226
227
0
0
-255
-255
23
24

64
65
105
106
146
147
187
188
228
229
0
0
255
-255
25

66
107
148
189
230
0
-255
26

67
108
149
190
231
0
-255
27

68
109
150
191
232
0
-255
28

69
110
151
192
233
0
-255
29

70
111
152
193
234
0
-255
30

71
112
153
194
235
0
-255
31

72
113
154
195
236
0
-255
32

73
114
155
196
237
0
-255
33

74
115
156
197
238
0
-255
34
35

75
76
116
117
157
158
198
199
239
240
0
0
-255
-255
36

77
118
159
200
241
0
-255
37

78
119
160
201
242
0
-255
38

79
120
161
202
243
0
-255
39

80
121
162
203
244
0
-255
40

81
122
163
204
245
0
-255

NOTE: 	-,




Add-15





d  I I	nn ran	-

SPECIF/CATIONS





¶ Keyboard
¶ Tone Generator

61 keys (C1~C6), with Initial/After touch

FM tone Generator (6 operators 32 algorythms)

¶ Simultaneous Note Output (Reverse priority)
1- voice: 16 notes (single play)
2- voice: 8 notes (Dual play) 2-voice: 16 notes (Split play)

¶ Internal Memory
¶ External ROM Memory

¶ External Memory

64 voices/32 performances, 2 micro tunings, 1 system set-up

128 voices/64 performances, micro tuning, fractional level scaling RAM cartridge (Optional, RAM4) = Internal Memory x 1
ï Micro floppy disk (Optional, MF2DD) = Internal Memory x 40, MIDI exclusive data

¶ Control Sliders and switches
Volume slider, Continuous sliders CS1, CS2 (Data entry)
Data entry switch x 2, Mode setting switch x 12, Voice switch x 32

¶ Controls


PITCH BEND WHEEL, MODULATION WHEEL

¶ External Control Terminals
BREATH CONTROL, SUSTAIN, FOOT SWITCH (Sustain, Portamento, Key hold, Soft), FOOT CONTROL 1 (Volume, Modulation, Voice parameter), FOOT CONTROL2 (Volume, Modulation).
RAMïROM CARTRIDGE SLOT MIDI IN - OUT - THRU

¶ Output Terminals
¶ Diak Drive

¶ Display

Output A/MIX-B, Headphones

3.5" Micro Floppy Disk Drive, built-in.
2DD IM Bytes (720K bytes when formatting)

LC: 40 letters x 2 lines (illuminated) LED: 7 segments x 2

¶ Dimensions (W x H x D), Weight
999 x 85.8 x 333.7 mm, 10.5 kg/11.2 kgï (ï DX? II FD)
¶ Power Supply, Power Consumption
U.S & Canadian Models: 120V, 50/60Hz General Model: 110V/220V/240V 50/60Hz

¶ Standard AcceHorles

¶ Optional AcceHorles


Music holder, ROM cartridge, 3.5" Micro floppy disk (MF2DD)

RAM Cartridge Flight Case Hard Case Soft Case
Cartridge Adaptor

RAM4 LC-7IIF LC-7IIH SC-7IIS ADP1

Foot Switch FC4/FC5, Foot Controller FC7, Breath Controller BC1, Head Set Breath Controller BC2, Stand LG-100, MIDI Cable MIDI 01/03/15, 3.5" Micro Floppy Disk MF2DD.



Add-16













,,.



SINCE 1887 ï	YAMAHA
NIPPON GAKKI CO., LTO. HAMAMATSU, JAPAN































IOMD-209UI 87 1 2.0 CR Printed in Japan